Genesis

In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth.
And the earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the face of the deep, and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.
And God said, Let there be light, and there was light.
And God saw the light, that it was good. And God divided the light from the darkness.
And God called the light Day, and the darkness he called Night. And there was evening and there was morning, one day.
And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters.
And God made the firmament, and divided the waters which were under the firmament from the waters which were above the firmament. And it was so.
And God called the firmament Heaven. And there was evening and there was morning, a second day.
And God said, Let the waters under the heavens be gathered together to one place, and let the dry land appear. And it was so.
And God called the dry land Earth, and he called the gathering together of the waters Seas. And God saw that it was good.
And God said, Let the earth put forth grass, herbs yielding seed, and fruit trees bearing fruit according to their kind (in which is the seed of them) upon the earth. And it was so.
And the earth brought forth grass, herbs yielding seed according to their kind, and trees bearing fruit in which is the seed of it, according to their kind. And God saw that it was good.
And there was evening and there was morning, a third day.
And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven to divide the day from the night, and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days and years.
And let them be for lights in the firmament of heaven to give light upon the earth. And it was so.
And God made the two great lights, the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the night, also the stars.
And God set them in the firmament of heaven to give light upon the earth,
and to rule over the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the darkness. And God saw that it was good.
And there was evening and there was morning, a fourth day.
And God said, Let the waters swarm with swarms of living creatures, and let birds fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven.
And God created the great sea creatures, and every living creature that moves, which the waters brought forth abundantly, according to their kind, and every winged bird according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let birds multiply on the earth.
And there was evening and there was morning, a fifth day.
And God said, Let the earth bring forth living creatures according to their kind, cattle, and creeping things, and beasts of the earth according to their kind. And it was so.
And God made the beasts of the earth according to their kind, and the cattle according to their kind, and everything that creeps upon the ground according to its kind. And God saw that it was good.
And God said, Let us make mankind in our image-after our likeness-and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth.
And God created mankind in his own image, in the image of God he created him, male and female he created them.
And God blessed them. And God said to them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth, and have power over it, and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the heavens, and over every living thing that moves upon the earth.
And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb yielding seed, which is upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed. To you it shall be for food,
and to every beast of the earth, and to every bird of the heavens, and to everything that creeps upon the earth in which there is life, for food-every green herb. And it was so.
And God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very good. And there was evening and there was morning, the sixth day.

And the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of them.
And on the seventh day God finished his work which he had made, and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made.
And God blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it, because in it he rested from all his work which God had created and made.
These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth when they were created, in the day that Jehovah God made earth and heaven.
And no plant of the field was yet in the earth, and no herb of the field had yet sprung up, for Jehovah God had not caused it to rain upon the earth. And there was not a man to till the ground,
but there went up a mist from the earth, and watered the whole face of the ground.
And Jehovah God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of life, and man became a living soul.
And Jehovah God planted a garden eastward, in Eden, and there he put the man whom he had formed.
And out of the ground Jehovah God made to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for food, also the tree of life in the midst of the garden, and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
And a river went out of Eden to water the garden, and from there it was divided, and became four heads.
The name of the first is Pishon. That is it which encompasses the whole land of Havilah, where there is gold.
And the gold of that land is good. There is bdellium and the onyx stone.
And the name of the second river is Gihon. The same is it which encompasses the whole land of Cush.
And the name of the third river is Hiddekel. That is it which goes in front of Assyria. And the fourth river is the Euphrates.
And Jehovah God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it and to keep it.
And Jehovah God commanded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou may freely eat,
but of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it. For in the day that thou eat of it thou shall surely die.
And Jehovah God said, It is not good that the man should be alone, I will make a help meet for him.
And out of the ground Jehovah God formed every beast of the field, and every bird of the heavens, and brought them to the man to see what he would call them, and whatever the man called every living creature, that was the name of it.
And the man gave names to all cattle, and to the birds of the heavens, and to every beast of the field, but for man there was not found a help meet for him.
And Jehovah God caused a deep sleep to fall upon the man, and he slept. And God took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh in place of it.
And the rib, which Jehovah God had taken from the man, he made a woman, and brought her to the man.
And the man said, This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh. She shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.
Therefore a man shall leave his father and his mother, and shall cling to his wife, and the two shall be one flesh.
And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

Now the serpent was more cunning than any beast of the field which Jehovah God had made. And he said to the woman, Yea, has God said, Ye shall not eat of any tree of the garden?
And the woman said to the serpent, Of the fruit of the trees of the garden we may eat,
but of the fruit of the tree which is in the midst of the garden, God has said, Ye shall not eat of it, nor shall ye touch it, lest ye die.
And the serpent said to the woman, Ye shall not surely die.
For God knows that in the day ye eat of it, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil.
And when the woman saw that the tree was good for food, and that it was a delight to the eyes, and that the tree was to be desired to make wise, she took of the fruit of it, and ate. And she also gave to her husband with her, and he ate.
And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they were naked. And they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.
And they heard the voice of Jehovah God walking in the garden in the cool of the day. And the man and his wife hid themselves from the presence of Jehovah God amongst the trees of the garden.
And Jehovah God called to the man, and said to him, Where are thou?
And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked. And I hid myself.
And he said, Who told thee that thou was naked? Have thou eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee that thou should not eat?
And the man said, The woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I ate.
And Jehovah God said to the woman, What is this thou have done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I ate.
And Jehovah God said to the serpent, Because thou have done this, cursed are thou above all cattle, and above every beast of the field. Upon thy belly thou shall go, and dust thou shall eat all the days of thy life.
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed. He shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel.
To the woman he said, I will greatly multiply thy pain and thy childbearing, in pain thou shall bring forth children. And thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee.
And to Adam he said, Because thou have hearkened to the voice of thy wife, and have eaten of the tree, of which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shall not eat of it, cursed is the ground for thy sake. In toil thou shall eat of it all the days of thy life.
Also, thorns and thistles it shall bring forth to thee, and thou shall eat the herb of the field.
In the sweat of thy face thou shall eat bread, till thou return to the ground, for out of it thou were taken. For thou are dust, and to dust thou shall return.
And the man called his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all living.
And Jehovah God made for Adam and for his wife coats of skins, and clothed them.
And Jehovah God said, Behold, the man has become as one of us, to know good and evil, and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of life, and eat, and live forever-
therefore Jehovah God sent him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from where he was taken.
So he drove out the man. And he placed at the east of the garden of Eden the cherubim, and the flame of a sword which turned every way, to guard the way of the tree of life.

And the man knew Eve his wife, and she conceived, and bore Cain, and said, I have gotten a man from Jehovah.
And again she bore his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground.
And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought an offering to Jehovah of the fruit of the ground.
And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat of it. And Jehovah had respect to Abel and to his offering,
but he did not have respect to Cain and to his offering. And Cain was very angry, and his countenance fell.
And Jehovah said to Cain, Why are thou angry? And why has thy countenance fallen?
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? And if thou do not well, sin crouches at the door. Its desire shall be for thee, and thou shall rule over it.
And Cain told Abel his brother. And it came to pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his brother, and killed him.
And Jehovah said to Cain, Where is Abel thy brother? And he said, I know not. Am I my brother's keeper?
And he said, What have thou done? The voice of thy brother's blood cries to me from the ground.
And now cursed are thou from the ground, which has opened its mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand.
When thou till the ground, it shall not henceforth yield to thee its strength. A fugitive and a wanderer thou shall be on the earth.
And Cain said to Jehovah, My punishment is greater than I can bear.
Behold, thou have driven me out this day from the face of the ground, and I shall be hid from thy face, and I shall be a fugitive and a wanderer in the earth. And it shall come to pass, that whoever finds me shall slay me.
And Jehovah said to him, Therefore whoever kills Cain, vengeance shall be taken on him sevenfold. And Jehovah appointed a sign for Cain, lest any who finds him should smite him.
And Cain went out from the presence of Jehovah, and dwelt in the land of Nod, on the east of Eden.
And Cain knew his wife, and she conceived, and bore Enoch. And Cain built a city, and called the name of the city after the name of his son, Enoch.
And to Enoch was born Irad, and Irad begot Mehujael, and Mehujael begot Methushael, and Methushael begot Lamech.
And Lamech took to him two wives. The name of the one was Adah, and the name of the other Zillah.
And Adah bore Jabal. He was the father of such as dwell in tents and have cattle.
And his brother's name was Jubal. He was the father of all such as handle the harp and pipe.
And Zillah, she also bore Tubal-cain, the forger of every cutting instrument of brass and iron. And the sister of Tubal-cain was Naamah.
And Lamech said to his wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice, ye wives of Lamech, hearken to my speech. For I have killed a man for wounding me, and a young man for bruising me.
If Cain shall be avenged seven fold, truly Lamech seventy-seven fold.
And Adam knew his wife again, and she bore a son, and called his name Seth. For, she said, God has appointed for me another seed instead of Abel, for Cain killed him.
And to Seth, to him also there was born a son, and he called his name Enosh. Then men began to call upon the name of Jehovah.

This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God he made him,
male and female he created them, and blessed them, and called their name Man, in the day when they were created.
And Adam lived a hundred and thirty years, and begot a son in his own likeness, according to his image, and called his name Seth.
And the days of Adam were eight hundred years after he begot Seth. And he begot sons and daughters.
And all the days that Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years, and he died.
And Seth lived a hundred and five years, and begot Enosh.
And Seth lived eight hundred and seven years after he begot Enosh, and begot sons and daughters.
And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and twelve years, and he died.
And Enosh lived ninety years, and begot Kenan.
And Enosh lived eight hundred and fifteen years after he begot Kenan, and begot sons and daughters.
And all the days of Enosh were nine hundred and five years, and he died.
And Kenan lived seventy years, and begot Mahalalel.
And Kenan lived eight hundred and forty years after he begot Mahalalel, and begot sons and daughters.
And all the days of Kenan were nine hundred and ten years, and he died.
And Mahalalel lived sixty-five years, and begot Jared.
And Mahalalel lived eight hundred and thirty years after he begot Jared, and begot sons and daughters.
And all the days of Mahalalel were eight hundred and ninety-five years, and he died.
And Jared lived a hundred sixty-two years, and begot Enoch.
And Jared lived eight hundred years after he begot Enoch, and begot sons and daughters.
And all the days of Jared were nine hundred sixty-two years, and he died.
And Enoch lived sixty-five years, and begot Methuselah.
And Enoch walked with God after he begot Methuselah three hundred years, and begot sons and daughters.
And all the days of Enoch were three hundred sixty-five years.
And Enoch walked with God, and he was not, for God took him.
And Methuselah lived a hundred eighty-seven years, and begot Lamech.
And Methuselah lived seven hundred eighty-two years after he begot Lamech, and begot sons and daughters.
And all the days of Methuselah were nine hundred sixty-nine years, and he died.
And Lamech lived a hundred eighty-two years, and begot a son.
And he called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us in our work and in the toil of our hands, because of the ground which Jehovah has cursed.
And Lamech lived five hundred ninety-five years after he begot Noah, and begot sons and daughters.
And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy-seven years, and he died.
And Noah was five hundred years old. And Noah begot Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of the ground, and daughters were born to them,
that the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair. And they took to them wives of all that they chose.
And Jehovah said, My Spirit shall not abide in man forever, for he also is flesh. Yet shall his days be a hundred and twenty years.
The giants were on the earth in those days. And also after that, when the sons of God came to the daughters of men, and they bore sons to them, the same were the mighty men who were of old, the men of renown.
And Jehovah saw that the wickedness of man was great on the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil continually.
And Jehovah regretted that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him in his heart.
And Jehovah said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the ground, from man, to beast, to creeping things, and birds of the heavens, for I regret that I have made them.
But Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.
These are the generations of Noah. Noah was a righteous man, perfect in his generations. Noah walked with God.
And Noah begot three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
And the earth was corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence.
And God saw the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt, for all flesh had corrupted their way upon the earth.
And God said to Noah, The end of all flesh has come before me, for the earth is filled with violence through them, and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.
Make thee an ark of gopher wood. Thou shall make rooms in the ark, and shall pitch it inside and outside with pitch.
The length of the ark three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits.
Thou shall make a light for the ark, and thou shall finish it to a cubit upward. And thou shall set the door of the ark in the side of it, with lower, second, and third stories thou shall make it.
And I, behold, I bring the flood of waters upon this earth, to destroy all flesh, in which is the breath of life, from under heaven. Everything that is on the earth shall die.
But I will establish my covenant with thee. And thou shall come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives with thee.
And of every living thing of all flesh, two of every sort thou shall bring into the ark, to keep them alive with thee. They shall be male and female.
Of the birds according to their kind, and of the cattle according to their kind, of every creeping thing of the ground according to its kind. Two of every sort shall come to thee, to keep them alive.
And take thou to thee of all food that is eaten, and gather it to thee, and it shall be for food for thee, and for them.
Thus Noah did; according to all that God commanded him, so he did.

And Jehovah said to Noah, Come, thou and all thy house into the ark, for I have seen thee righteous before me in this generation.
Of every clean beast thou shall take to thee by sevens, the male and his female. And of the beasts that are not clean two, the male and his female.
Also of the birds of the heavens by sevens, male and female, to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth.
For yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days and forty nights, and every living thing that I have made I will destroy from off the face of the ground.
And Noah did according to all that Jehovah commanded him.
And Noah was six hundred years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.
And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood.
Of clean beasts, and of beasts that are not clean, and of birds, and of everything that creeps upon the ground,
there went in two by two to Noah into the ark, male and female, as God commanded Noah.
And it came to pass after the seven days, that the waters of the flood were upon the earth.
In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second month, on the seventeenth day of the month, on the same day all the fountains of the great deep were broken up, and the windows of heaven were opened.
And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty nights.
In the selfsame day Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his sons with them, entered into the ark,
they, and every beast according to its kind, and all the cattle according to their kind, and every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth according to its kind, and every bird according to its kind, every bird of every sort.
And they went in to Noah into the ark, two by two of all flesh in which is the breath of life.
And those that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as God commanded him. And Jehovah shut him in.
And the flood was forty days upon the earth. And the waters increased, and bore up the ark, and it was lifted up above the earth.
And the waters prevailed, and increased greatly upon the earth, and the ark went upon the face of the waters.
And the waters prevailed exceedingly upon the earth, and all the high mountains that were under the whole heaven were covered,
fifteen cubits upward. The waters prevailed, and the mountains were covered.
And all flesh died that moved upon the earth, from birds, to cattle, to beasts, and every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth, and every man.
All in whose nostrils was the breath of the spirit of life, of all that was on the dry land, died.
And every living thing was destroyed that was upon the face of the ground, from man, to cattle, to creeping things, and birds of the heavens, and they were destroyed from the earth. And only Noah was left, and those who were with him in the ark.
And the waters prevailed upon the earth a hundred and fifty days.

And God remembered Noah, and all the beasts, and all the cattle that were with him in the ark. And God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters subsided.
Also the fountains of the deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained.
And the waters returned from off the earth continually. And after the end of a hundred and fifty days the waters decreased.
And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat.
And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month. In the tenth month, on the first day of the month, the tops of the mountains were seen.
And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made.
And he sent forth a raven. And it went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from off the earth.
And he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground.
But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot. And she returned to him to the ark, for the waters were on the face of the whole earth. And he put forth his hand, and took her, and brought her in to him into the ark.
And he stayed yet another seven days, and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark.
And the dove came in to him at evening. And, lo, in her mouth an olive leaf plucked off, so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off the earth.
And he stayed yet seven other days, and sent forth the dove. And she did not return again to him any more.
And it came to pass in the six hundred and first year, in the first month, the first day of the month, the waters were dried up from off the earth. And Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked. And, behold, the face of the ground was dried.
And in the second month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, the earth was dry.
And God spoke to Noah, saying,
Go forth from the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee.
Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee of all flesh, both birds and cattle, and every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth, that they may breed abundantly on the earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.
And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him.
Every beast, every creeping thing, and every bird, whatever moves upon the earth, according to their families, went forth out of the ark.
And Noah built an altar to Jehovah, and took of every clean beast, and of every clean bird, and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
And Jehovah smelled the sweet savor. And Jehovah said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake, for that the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth. Neither will I again any more smite everything living, as I have done.
While the earth remains, seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said to them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and fill the earth.
And the fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and upon every bird of the heavens, with all with which the ground teems, and all the fishes of the sea. They are delivered into your hand.
Every moving thing that lives shall be food for you. As the green herb, I have given you all.
But flesh with the life of it, which is the blood of it, ye shall not eat.
And surely your blood, the blood of your lives, I will require. At the hand of every beast I will require it. And at the hand of man, even at the hand of every man's brother, I will require the life of man.
Whoever sheds man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed. For in the image of God he made man.
And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply. Bring forth abundantly on the earth, and multiply on it.
And God spoke to Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,
And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you,
and with every living creature that is with you, the birds, the cattle, and every beast of the earth with you, of all that go out of the ark, even every beast of the earth.
And I will establish my covenant with you. Neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of the flood, nor shall there be a flood any more to destroy the earth.
I set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a sign of a covenant between me and the earth.
And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud.
And I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh. And the waters shall no more become a flood to destroy all flesh.
And the bow shall be in the cloud, and I will look upon it, that I may remember the everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth.
And God said to Noah, This is the sign of the covenant which I have established between me and all flesh that is upon the earth.
And the sons of Noah, who went forth from the ark, were Shem, and Ham, and Japheth. And Ham is the father of Canaan.
These three were the sons of Noah, and from these the whole earth was spread over.
And Noah began to be a farmer, and planted a vineyard.
And he drank of the wine, and was drunken. And he was uncovered within his tent.
And Ham, the father of Canaan, saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brothers outside.
And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid it upon both their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their father. And their faces were backward, and they did not see their father's nakedness.
And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what his youngest son had done to him.
And he said, Cursed be Canaan. He shall be a servant of servants to his brothers.
And he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem. And let Canaan be his servant.
God enlarge Japheth, and let him dwell in the tents of Shem. And let Canaan be his servant.
And Noah lived three hundred and fifty years after the flood.
And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years, and he died.

Now these are the generations of the sons of Noah, of Shem, Ham, and Japheth. And sons were born to them after the flood.
Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
Ashkenaz, and Riphath, and Togarmah.
Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim.
From these were the islands of the nations divided in their lands, every man according to his tongue, according to their families, in their nations.
Cush, and Mizraim, and Put, and Canaan.
Sheba, and Dedan.
And Cush begot Nimrod. He began to be a mighty man on the earth.
He was a mighty hunter before Jehovah. Therefore it is said, Like Nimrod a mighty hunter before Jehovah.
And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar.
He went forth out of that land into Assyria, and built Nineveh, and Rehoboth-ir, and Calah,
and Resen between Nineveh and Calah (the same is the great city).
And Mizraim begot Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,
and Pathrusim, and Casluhim (from where the Philistines went forth), and Caphtorim.
And Canaan begot Sidon his firstborn, and Heth,
and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite,
and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite. And afterward the families of the Canaanite were spread abroad.
And the border of the Canaanite was from Sidon, as thou go toward Gerar, to Gaza, as thou go toward Sodom and Gomorrah and Admah and Zeboiim, to Lasha.
These are the sons of Ham, according to their families, according to their tongues, in their lands, in their nations.
And to Shem, the father of all the sons of Eber, the elder brother of Japheth, sons were also born to him.
Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram.
Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Mash.
And Arphaxad begot Shelah, and Shelah begot Eber.
And to Eber were born two sons. The name of the one was Peleg. For in his days the earth was divided. And his brother's name was Joktan.
And Joktan begot Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,
and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
and Obal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab. All these were the sons of Joktan.
And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou go toward Sephar, the mountain of the east.
These are the sons of Shem, according to their families, according to their tongues, in their lands, according to their nations.
These are the families of the sons of Noah, according to their generations, in their nations. And from these the nations were divided on the earth after the flood.

And the whole earth was of one language and of one speech.
And it came to pass, as they journeyed east, that they found a plain in the land of Shinar, and they dwelt there.
And they said one to another, Come, let us make brick, and burn them thoroughly. And they had brick for stone, and they had slime for mortar.
And they said, Come, let us build a city for us, and a tower, and its top in the heavens. And let us make a name for us, lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth.
And Jehovah came down to see the city and the tower, which the sons of men built.
And Jehovah said, Behold, they are one people, and they have all one language, and this is what they begin to do. And now nothing will be withheld from them, which they propose to do.
Come, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may not understand each other's speech.
So Jehovah scattered them abroad from there upon the face of all the earth, and they left off building the city.
Therefore the name of it was called Babel, because Jehovah there confounded the language of all the earth, and from there Jehovah scattered them abroad upon the face of all the earth.
These are the generations of Shem. Shem was a hundred years old, and begot Arphaxad two years after the flood.
And Shem lived five hundred years after he begot Arphaxad, and begot sons and daughters.
And Arphaxad lived a hundred and thirty-five years, and begot Cainan.
And Arphaxad lived after he had begotten Cainan, four hundred years, and begot sons and daughters, and died. And Cainan lived a hundred and thirty years and begot Shelah; and Cainan lived after he had begotten Shelah, three hundred and thirty years, and begot sons and daughters, and died.
And Shelah lived thirty years, and begot Eber.
And Shelah lived four hundred and three years after he begot Eber, and begot sons and daughters.
And Eber lived thirty-four years, and begot Peleg.
And Eber lived four hundred and thirty years after he begot Peleg, and begot sons and daughters.
And Peleg lived thirty years, and begot Reu.
And Peleg lived two hundred and nine years after he begot Reu, and begot sons and daughters.
And Reu lived thirty-two years, and begot Serug.
And Reu lived two hundred and seven years after he begot Serug, and begot sons and daughters.
And Serug lived thirty years, and begot Nahor.
And Serug lived two hundred years after he begot Nahor, and begot sons and daughters.
And Nahor lived twenty-nine years, and begot Terah.
And Nahor lived a hundred and nineteen years after he begot Terah, and begot sons and daughters.
And Terah lived seventy years, and begot Abram, Nahor, and Haran.
Terah begot Abram, Nahor, and Haran. And Haran begot Lot.
And Haran died before his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.
And Abram and Nahor took wives to themselves. The name of Abram's wife was Sarai, and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah.
And Sarai was barren; she had no child.
And Terah took Abram his son, and Lot the son of Haran, his son's son, and Sarai his daughter-in-law, his son Abram's wife. And they went forth with them from Ur of the Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan. And they came to Haran, and dwelt there.
And the days of Terah were two hundred and five years, and Terah died in Haran.

Now Jehovah said to Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, to the land that I will show thee.
And I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and be thou a blessing.
And I will bless those who bless thee, and he who curses thee I will curse. And in thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
So Abram went as Jehovah had spoken to him, and Lot went with him. And Abram was seventy-five years old when he departed out of Haran.
And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and the souls that they had gotten in Haran, and they went forth to go into the land of Canaan. And they came into the land of Canaan.
And Abram passed through the land to the place of Shechem, to the oak of Moreh. And the Canaanite was then in the land.
And Jehovah appeared to Abram, and said, I will give this land to thy seed. And there he built an altar to Jehovah, who appeared to him.
And he moved from there to the mountain on the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, having Bethel on the west, and Ai on the east. And there he built an altar to Jehovah, and called upon the name of Jehovah.
And Abram journeyed, going on still toward the South.
And there was a famine in the land. And Abram went down into Egypt to sojourn there, for the famine was severe in the land.
And it came to pass, when he came near to enter into Egypt, that he said to Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou are a fair woman to look upon.
And it shall come to pass, when the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This is his wife. And they will kill me, but they will save thee alive.
Say, I pray thee, thou are my sister, that it may be well with me for thy sake, and that my soul may live because of thee.
And it came to pass, that, when Abram came into Egypt, the Egyptians beheld the woman that she was very fair.
And the princes of Pharaoh saw her, and praised her to Pharaoh. And the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house.
And he dealt well with Abram for her sake. And he had sheep, and oxen, and he-donkeys, and men-servants, and maid-servants, and she-donkeys, and camels.
And Jehovah plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of Sarai, Abram's wife.
And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What is this that thou have done to me? Why did thou not tell me that she was thy wife?
Why did thou say, She is my sister, so that I took her to be my wife? Now therefore behold thy wife. Take her, and go thy way.
And Pharaoh gave men command concerning him. And they brought him on the way, and his wife, and all that he had.

And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all that he had, and Lot with him, into the South.
And Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
And he went on his journeys from the South even to Bethel, to the place where his tent had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Ai,
to the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first. And Abram called on the name of Jehovah there.
And Lot also, who went with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents.
And the land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell together. For their substance was great, so that they could not dwell together.
And there was a strife between the herdsmen of Abram's cattle and the herdsmen of Lot's cattle. And the Canaanite and the Perizzite then dwelt in the land.
And Abram said to Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my herdsmen and thy herdsmen, for we are brothers.
Is not the whole land before thee? Separate thyself, I pray thee, from me. If the left hand, then I will go to the right. Or if the right hand, then I will go to the left.
And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the Plain of the Jordan, that it was well watered everywhere (before Jehovah destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah) like the garden of Jehovah, like the land of Egypt, as thou go to Zoar.
So Lot chose for himself all the Plain of the Jordan. And Lot journeyed east, and they separated themselves the one from the other.
Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan. And Lot dwelt in the cities of the Plain, and moved his tent as far as Sodom.
Now the men of Sodom were exceedingly wicked and sinners against Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Abram, after Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou are, northward and southward and eastward and westward.
For all the land which thou see, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed forever.
And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth. So that if a man can number the dust of the earth, then may thy seed also be numbered.
Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of it, for to thee I will give it.
And Abram moved his tent, and came and dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron, and built an altar there to Jehovah.

And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar, Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim,
that they made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar).
All these joined together in the valley of Siddim (the same is the Salt Sea).
They served Chedorlaomer twelve years, and in the thirteenth year they rebelled.
And in the fourteenth year Chedorlaomer came, and the kings that were with him, and smote the Rephaim in Ashteroth-karnaim, and the Zuzim in Ham, and the Emim in Shaveh-kiriathaim,
and the Horites on their mount Seir, to Elparan, which is by the wilderness.
And they returned, and came to En-mishpat (the same is Kadesh), and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and also the Amorites, who dwelt in Hazazon-tamar.
And there went out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah, and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same is Zoar), and they set the battle in array against them in the valley of Siddim,
against Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of Goiim, and Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings against the five.
Now the valley of Siddim was full of slime pits. And the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and they fell there. And those who remained fled to the mountain.
And they took all the goods of Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their food, and went their way.
And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his goods, and departed.
And some man came who had escaped, and told Abram the Hebrew. Now he dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, the Amorite, brother of Eshcol, and brother of Aner. And these were allies with Abram.
And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he led forth his trained men, born in his house, three hundred and eighteen, and pursued as far as Dan.
And he divided himself against them by night, he and his servants, and smote them, and pursued them to Hobah, which is on the left hand of Damascus.
And he brought back all the goods, and also brought back his brother Lot, and his goods, and also the women, and the people.
And the king of Sodom went out to meet him, after his return from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer and the kings that were with him, at the valley of Shaveh (the same is the King's Valley).
And Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine. And he was priest of God Most High.
And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth.
And blessed be God Most High, who has delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And Abram gave him a tenth of all.
And the king of Sodom said to Abram, Give me the men, and take the goods to thyself.
And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lifted up my hand to Jehovah, God Most High, possessor of heaven and earth,
that I will not take a thread nor a shoe latchet nor anything that is thine, lest thou should say, I have made Abram rich,
except only that which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men who went with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre. Let them take their portion.

After these things the word of Jehovah came to Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram. I am thy shield, thy exceedingly great reward.
And Abram said, O lord Jehovah, what will thou give me, since I go childless. And he who shall be possessor of my house is Eliezer of Damascus?
And Abram said, Behold, thou have given no seed to me. And, lo, a man born in my house is my heir.
And, behold, the word of Jehovah came to him, saying, This man shall not be thine heir, but he who shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine heir.
And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward heaven, and number the stars, if thou be able to number them. And he said to him, So shall thy seed be.
And he believed in Jehovah, and he reckoned it to him for righteousness.
And he said to him, I am Jehovah who brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this land to inherit it.
And he said, O lord Jehovah, how shall I know that I shall inherit it?
And he said to him, Take a heifer three years old for me, and a she-goat three years old, and a ram three years old, and a turtle dove, and a young pigeon.
And he took all these for him, and divided them in the midst, and laid each half opposite the other. But he did not divide the birds.
And the birds of prey came down upon the carcasses, and Abram drove them away.
And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram. And, lo, a horror of great darkness fell upon him.
And he said to Abram, Know of a certainty that thy seed shall be sojourners in a land that is not theirs. And shall serve them, and they shall afflict them four hundred years.
And also I will judge that nation, whom they shall serve, and afterward they shall come out with great substance.
But thou will go to thy fathers in peace; thou will be buried in a good old age.
And in the fourth generation they shall come here again, for the iniquity of the Amorite is not yet full.
And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold, a smoking furnace, and a flaming torch that passed between these pieces.
the Kenite, and the Kenizzite, and the Kadmonite,
and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Rephaim,
and the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Girgashite, and the Jebusite.

Now Sarai, Abram's wife, bore him no sons. And she had a handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name was Hagar.
And Sarai said to Abram, Behold now, Jehovah has restrained me from bearing. Go in, I pray thee, to my handmaid. It may be that I will obtain sons by her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai.
And Sarai, Abram's wife, took Hagar the Egyptian, her handmaid, after Abram had dwelt ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to Abram her husband to be his wife.
And he went in to Hagar, and she conceived. And when she saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
And Sarai said to Abram, My wrong be upon thee. I gave my handmaid into they bosom, and when she saw that she had conceived, I was despised in her eyes. Jehovah judge between me and thee.
But Abram said to Sarai, Behold, thy maid is in thy hand, do to her that which is good in thine eyes. And Sarai dealt harshly with her, and she fled from her face.
And the agent of Jehovah found her by a fountain of water in the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur.
And he said, Hagar, Sarai's handmaid, from where have thou come? And where are thou going? And she said, I am fleeing from the face of my mistress Sarai.
And the agent of Jehovah said to her, Return to thy mistress, and submit thyself under her hands.
And the agent of Jehovah said to her, I will greatly multiply thy seed, that it shall not be numbered for multitude.
And the agent of Jehovah said to her, Behold, thou are with child, and shall bear a son, and thou shall call his name Ishmael, because Jehovah has heard thy affliction.
And he will be a wild donkey among men, his hand against every man, and every man's hand against him, and he shall dwell in the presence of all his brothers.
And she called the name of Jehovah who spoke to her, Thou are a God who sees, for she said, Have I even here looked behind him who sees me?
Therefore the well was called Beer-lahai-roi. Behold, it is between Kadesh and Bered.
And Hagar bore Abram a son. And Abram called the name of his son, whom Hagar bore, Ishmael.
And Abram was eighty-six years old when Hagar bore Ishmael to Abram.

And when Abram was ninety-nine years old, Jehovah appeared to Abram, and said to him, I am God Almighty, walk before me, and be thou perfect.
And I will make my covenant between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly.
And Abram fell on his face. And God talked with him, saying,
As for me, behold, my covenant is with thee, and thou shall be the father of a multitude of nations.
Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy name shall be Abraham, for I have made thee the father of a multitude of nations.
And I will make thee exceedingly fruitful. And I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee.
And I will establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee throughout their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God to thee and to thy seed after thee.
And I will give to thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land of thy sojourning, all the land of Canaan for an everlasting possession, and I will be their God.
And God said to Abraham, And as for thee, thou shall keep my covenant, thou, and thy seed after thee throughout their generations.
every male among you shall be circumcised.
And ye shall be circumcised in the flesh of your foreskin, and it shall be a sign of a covenant between me and you.
he who is born in the house, or bought with money of any foreigner that is not of thy seed.
He who is born in thy house, and he who is bought with thy money, must be circumcised. And my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting covenant.
And the uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin, that soul shall be cut off from his people; he has broken my covenant.
And God said to Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shall not call her name Sarai, but her name shall be Sarah.
And I will bless her. And moreover I will give thee a son by her. Yea, I will bless her, and she shall be a mother of nations; kings of peoples shall be by her.
Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a child be born to him who is a hundred years old? And shall Sarah, who is ninety years old, bear?
And Abraham said to God, Oh that Ishmael might live before thee!
And God said, No, but Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son, and thou shall call his name Isaac. And I will establish my covenant with him for an everlasting covenant for his seed after him.
And as for Ishmael, I have heard thee. Behold, I have blessed him, and will make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly. He shall beget twelve princes, and I will make him a great nation.
But I will establish my covenant with Isaac, whom Sarah shall bear to thee at this set time in the next year.
And he left off talking with him, and God went up from Abraham.
And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all who were born in his house, and all who were bought with his money, every male among the men of Abraham's house, and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin in the selfsame day, as God had said to him.
And Abraham was ninety-nine years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
And Ishmael his son was thirteen years old when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin.
In the selfsame day Abraham was circumcised, and Ishmael his son.
And all the men of his house, those born in the house, and those bought with money from a foreigner, were circumcised with him.

And Jehovah appeared to him by the oaks of Mamre, as he sat in the tent door in the heat of the day.
And he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him. And when he saw them, he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself to the earth,
and said, My lord, if now I have found favor in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant.
Let now a little water be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest yourselves under the tree.
And I will fetch a morsel of bread, and strengthen ye your heart. After that ye shall pass on, inasmuch as ye came to your servant. And they said, Do so as thou have said.
And Abraham hastened into the tent to Sarah, and said, Make ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes.
And Abraham ran to the herd, and fetched a calf tender and good, and gave it to the servant. And he hastened to dress it.
And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he had dressed, and set it before them. And he stood by them under the tree, and they ate.
And they said to him, Where is Sarah thy wife? And he said, Behold, in the tent.
And he said, I will certainly return to thee when the season comes round, and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall have a son. And Sarah heard in the tent door, which was behind him.
Now Abraham and Sarah were old, and well stricken in age. It had ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
And Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I have become old shall I have pleasure, my lord also being old?
And Jehovah said to Abraham, Why did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I who am old certainly bear a child?
Is anything too hard for Jehovah? At the set time I will return to thee, when the season comes round, and Sarah shall have a son.
Then Sarah denied, saying, I did not laugh, for she was afraid. And he said, No, but thou did laugh.
And the men rose up from there, and looked toward Sodom. And Abraham went with them to bring them on the way.
And Jehovah said, Shall I hide from Abraham that which I do,
since Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him?
For I have known him, to the end that he may command his children and his household after him, that they may keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, to the end that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him.
And Jehovah said, Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous,
I will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according to the cry of it, which comes to me. And if not, I will know.
And the men turned from there, and went toward Sodom, but Abraham yet stood before Jehovah.
And Abraham drew near, and said, Will thou consume righteous men with wicked men?
Perhaps there are fifty righteous men within the city. Will thou consume and not spare the place for the fifty righteous men that are in it?
That be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay a righteous man with a wicked man, that so the righteous man should be as the wicked man. Far be it from thee. Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
And Jehovah said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous men within the city, then I will spare all the place for their sake.
And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord, who am but dust and ashes.
Perhaps there shall lack five of the fifty righteous men. Will thou destroy all the city for lack of five? And he said, I will not destroy it, if I find there forty-five.
And he spoke to him yet again, and said, Perhaps there shall be forty found there. And he said, I will not do it for the forty's sake.
And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak. Perhaps there shall be thirty found there. And he said, I will not do it, if I find thirty there.
And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon me to speak to the Lord. Perhaps there shall be twenty found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for the twenty's sake.
And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but this once. Perhaps ten shall be found there. And he said, I will not destroy it for the ten's sake.
And Jehovah went his way as soon as he had left off conversing with Abraham, and Abraham returned to his place.

And the two agents came to Sodom at evening, and Lot sat in the gate of Sodom. And Lot saw them, and rose up to meet them. And he bowed himself with his face to the earth,
and he said, Behold now, my lords, turn aside, I pray you, into your servant's house, and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early, and go on your way. And they said, No, but we will abide in the street all night.
And he urged them greatly. And they turned in to him, and entered into his house. And he made a feast for them, and baked unleavened bread, and they ate.
But before they lay down, the men of the city, the men of Sodom, encompassed the house around, both young and old, all the people from every quarter.
And they called to Lot, and said to him, Where are the men who came in to thee this night? Bring them out to us, that we may know them.
And Lot went out to them to the door, and shut the door after him.
And he said, I pray you, my brothers, do not so wickedly.
Behold now, I have two daughters who have not known a man. Let me, I pray you, bring them out to you, and do ye to them as is good in your eyes. Only do nothing to these men, inasmuch as they have come under the shadow of my roof.
And they said, Stand back. And they said, This one fellow came in to sojourn, and he will be a judge. Now we will deal worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed greatly upon the man, even Lot, and drew near to break the door.
But the men put forth their hand, and brought Lot into the house to them, and shut to the door.
And they smote the men who were at the door of the house with blindness, both small and great, so that they wearied themselves to find the door.
And the men said to Lot, Have thou here any besides? Son-in-law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whomever thou have in the city, bring them out of the place.
For we will destroy this place, because the cry of them has been great before Jehovah. And Jehovah has sent us to destroy it.
And Lot went out, and spoke to his sons-in-law, who married his daughters, and said, Up, get you out of this place, for Jehovah will destroy the city. But he seemed to his sons-in-law as a man jesting.
And when the morning arose, then the agents hurried Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters who are here, lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city.
But he lingered. And the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters, Jehovah being merciful to him, and they brought him forth, and set him outside the city.
And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life, do not look behind thee, neither stay thou in all the Plain. Escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.
And Lot said to them, Oh, not so, my lord.
Behold now, thy servant has found favor in thy sight, and thou have magnified thy loving kindness, which thou have shown to me in saving my life, and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest evil overtake me, and I die.
Behold now, this city is near to flee to, and it is a little one. Oh let me escape there (is it not a little one?), and my soul shall live.
And he said to him, See, I have accepted thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow the city of which thou have spoken.
Hasten thee, escape there, for I cannot do anything till thou have come there. Therefore the name of the city was called Zoar.
The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot came to Zoar.
Then Jehovah rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and fire from Jehovah out of heaven.
And he overthrew those cities, and all the Plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew upon the ground.
But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a pillar of salt.
And Abraham got up early in the morning to the place where he had stood before Jehovah.
And he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the Plain, and beheld, and, lo, the smoke of the land went up as the smoke of a furnace.
And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the Plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in which Lot dwelt.
And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and his two daughters with him, for he feared to dwell in Zoar. And he dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters.
And the firstborn said to the younger, Our father is old, and there is not a man on the earth to come in to us after the manner of all the earth.
Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that we may preserve seed by our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night. And the firstborn went in, and lay with her father. And he did not know when she lay down, nor when she arose.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said to the younger, Behold, I lay last night with my father. Let us make him drink wine this night also, and go thou in, and lie with him, that we may preserve seed by our father.
And they made their father drink wine that night also. And the younger arose, and lay with him. And he did not know when she lay down, nor when she arose.
Thus both the daughters of Lot were with child by their father.
And the firstborn bore a son, and called his name Moab. The same is the father of the Moabites to this day.
And the younger, she also bore a son, and called his name Ben-ammi. The same is the father of the sons of Ammon to this day.

And Abraham journeyed from there toward the land of the South, and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur. And he sojourned in Gerar.
And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She is my sister. And Abimelech king of Gerar sent, and took Sarah.
But God came to Abimelech in a dream of the night, and said to him, Behold, thou are but a dead man, because of the woman whom thou have taken, for she is a man's wife.
Now Abimelech had not come near her. And he said, Lord, will thou slay even a righteous nation?
Did he not himself say to me, She is my sister? And she, even she herself said, He is my brother. In the integrity of my heart and the innocence of my hands I have done this.
And God said to him in the dream, Yes, I know that in the integrity of thy heart thou have done this. And I also withheld thee from sinning against me. Therefore I did not allow thee to touch her.
Now therefore restore the man's wife. For he is a prophet, and he shall pray for thee, and thou shall live. And if thou do not restore her, know thou that thou shall surely die, thou, and all that are thine.
And Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his servants, and told all these things in their ear. And the men were exceedingly afraid.
Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said to him, What have thou done to us? And in what have I sinned against thee, that thou have brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? Thou have done deeds to me that ought not to be done.
And Abimelech said to Abraham, What did thou see, that thou have done this thing?
And Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will kill me because of my wife.
And moreover she is indeed my sister, the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother, and she became my wife.
And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I said to her, This is thy kindness which thou shall show to me. At every place where we shall come, say of me, He is my brother.
And Abimelech took sheep and oxen, and men-servants and women-servants, and gave them to Abraham, and restored to him Sarah his wife.
And Abimelech said, Behold, my land is before thee. Dwell where it pleases thee.
And to Sarah he said, Behold, I have given thy brother a thousand pieces of silver. Behold, it is for thee a covering of the eyes to all who are with thee. And in regard to all thou are righted.
And Abraham prayed to God, and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maid-servants. And they bore sons.
For Jehovah had closed up fast all the wombs of the house of Abimelech, because of Sarah, Abraham's wife.

And Jehovah visited Sarah as he had said, and Jehovah did to Sarah as he had spoken.
And Sarah conceived, and bore Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him.
And Abraham called the name of his son who was born to him, whom Sarah bore to him, Isaac.
And Abraham circumcised his son Isaac when he was eight days old, as God had commanded him.
And Abraham was a hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born to him.
And Sarah said, God has made me to laugh. Everyone who hears will laugh with me.
And she said, Who would have said to Abraham, that Sarah should give sons suck? For I have borne him a son in his old age.
And the child grew, and was weaned. And Abraham made a great feast on the day that Isaac was weaned.
And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, whom she had borne to Abraham, mocking.
Therefore she said to Abraham, Cast out this handmaid and her son. For the son of this handmaid shall not be heir with my son, even with Isaac.
And the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight on account of his son.
And God said to Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the lad, and because of thy handmaid. In all that Sarah says to thee, hearken to her voice. For in Isaac shall thy seed be called.
And also I will make a nation of the son of the handmaid, because he is thy seed.
And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and took bread and a bottle of water, and gave it to Hagar, putting it on her shoulder, and the child, and sent her away. And she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of Beersheba.
And the water in the bottle was spent, and she cast the child under one of the shrubs.
And she went, and sat herself down opposite him a good way off, as it were a bowshot. For she said, Let me not look upon the death of the child. And she sat opposite him, and lifted up her voice, and wept.
And God heard the voice of the lad. And the agent of God called to Hagar out of heaven, and said to her, What troubles thee, Hagar? Fear not, for God has heard the voice of the lad where he is.
Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in thy hand, for I will make him a great nation.
And God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water. And she went, and filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink.
And God was with the lad, and he grew. And he dwelt in the wilderness, and became, as he grew up, an archer.
And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran. And his mother took for him a wife out of the land of Egypt.
And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phicol the captain of his army spoke to Abraham, saying, God is with thee in all that thou do.
Now therefore swear to me here by God that thou will not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor with my son's son. But according to the kindness that I have done to thee, thou shall do to me, and to the land in which thou have sojourned.
And Abraham said, I will swear.
And Abraham reproved Abimelech because of the well of water which Abimelech's servants had taken away violently.
And Abimelech said, I know not who has done this thing, neither did thou tell me, nor yet did I hear of it, but today.
And Abraham took sheep and oxen, and gave them to Abimelech. And the two made a covenant.
And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves.
And Abimelech said to Abraham, What do these seven ewe lambs mean which thou have set by themselves?
And he said, These seven ewe lambs thou shall take from my hand, that it may be a witness to me, that I have dug this well.
Therefore he called that place Beersheba, because there they swore both of them.
So they made a covenant at Beersheba. And Abimelech rose up, and Phicol the captain of his army, and they returned into the land of the Philistines.
And Abraham planted a tamarisk tree in Beersheba, and there called on the name of Jehovah, the Everlasting God.
And Abraham sojourned in the land of the Philistines many days.

And it came to pass after these things, that God proved Abraham, and said to him, Abraham. And he said, Here I am.
And he said, Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou love, even Isaac, and get thee into the land of Moriah. And offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of.
And Abraham rose early in the morning, and saddled his donkey, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son. And he split the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went to the place of which God had told him.
On the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off.
And Abraham said to his young men, Abide ye here with the donkey, and I and the lad will go yonder, and we will worship, and come again to you.
And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid it upon Isaac his son. And he took in his hand the fire and the knife. And they went both of them together.
And Isaac spoke to Abraham his father, and said, My father. And he said, Here I am, my son. And he said, Behold, the fire and the wood, but where is the lamb for a burnt offering?
And Abraham said, God will provide himself the lamb for a burnt offering, my son. So they went both of them together.
And they came to the place which God had told him of. And Abraham built the altar there, and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on the altar, upon the wood.
And Abraham stretched forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son.
And the agent of Jehovah called to him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham. And he said, Here I am.
And he said, Do not lay thy hand upon the lad, neither do thou anything to him. For now I know that thou fear God, since thou have not withheld thy son, thine only son, from me.
And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, behind him a ram caught in the thicket by his horns. And Abraham went and took the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering instead of his son.
And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh. As it is said to this day, In the mount of Jehovah it shall be provided.
And the agent of Jehovah called to Abraham a second time out of heaven,
and said, By myself I have sworn, says Jehovah, because thou have done this thing, and have not withheld thy son, thine only son,
that in blessing I will bless thee, and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heavens, and as the sand which is upon the seashore, and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies,
and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed, because thou have obeyed my voice.
So Abraham returned to his young men. And they rose up and went together to Beersheba. And Abraham dwelt at Beersheba.
Uz his first born, and Buz his brother, and Kemuel the father of Aram,
and Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel.
And Bethuel begot Rebekah. These eight Milcah bore to Nahor, Abraham's brother.
And his concubine, whose name was Reumah, she also bore Tebah, and Gaham, and Tahash, and Maacah.

And the life of Sarah was a hundred and twenty-seven years. These were the years of the life of Sarah.
And Sarah died in Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron), in the land of Canaan. And Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.
And Abraham rose up from before his dead, and spoke to the sons of Heth, saying,
I am a stranger and a sojourner with you. Give me a possession of a burying place with you, that I may bury my dead out of my sight.
And the sons of Heth answered Abraham, saying to him,
Hear us, my lord. Thou are a prince of God among us. Bury thy dead in our choice sepulchers. None of us shall withhold from thee his sepulcher, but that thou may bury thy dead.
And Abraham rose up, and bowed himself to the people of the land, even to the sons of Heth.
And he conversed with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight, hear me, and entreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,
that he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he has, which is in the end of his field. Let him give it to me for the full price in the midst of you for a possession of a burying place.
Now Ephron was sitting in the midst of the sons of Heth. And Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the sons of Heth, even of all who went in at the gate of his city, saying,
No, my lord, hear me. I give thee the field. And the cave that is in it, I give it to thee. I give it to thee in the presence of the sons of my people. Bury thy dead.
And Abraham bowed himself down before the people of the land.
And he spoke to Ephron in the audience of the people of the land, saying, But if thou will, I pray thee, hear me. I will give the price of the field. Take it from me, and I will bury my dead there.
And Ephron answered Abraham, saying to him,
My lord, hearken to me. A piece of land worth four hundred shekels of silver, what is that between me and thee? Therefore bury thy dead.
And Abraham hearkened to Ephron. And Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver that he had named in the audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current money with the merchant.
So the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah, which was before Mamre, the field, and the cave which was in it, and all the trees that were in the field, that were in all the border of it round about, were made sure
to Abraham for a possession in the presence of the sons of Heth, before all who went in at the gate of his city.
And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre (the same is Hebron), in the land of Canaan.
And the field, and the cave that is in it, were made sure to Abraham for a possession of a burying place by the sons of Heth.

And Abraham was old, well stricken in age. And Jehovah had blessed Abraham in all things.
And Abraham said to his servant, the elder of his house, who ruled over all that he had, Put thy hand, I pray thee, under my thigh.
And I will make thee swear by Jehovah, the God of heaven and the God of the earth, that thou will not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I dwell.
But thou shall go to my country, and to my kindred, and take a wife for my son Isaac.
And the servant said to him, Perhaps the woman will not be willing to follow me to this land. Must I bring thy son again to the land from where thou came?
And Abraham said to him, Beware thou that thou not bring my son there again.
Jehovah, the God of heaven, who took me from my father's house, and from the land of my nativity, and who spoke to me, and who swore to me, saying, To thy seed I will give this land, he will send his agent before thee, and thou shall take a wife for my son from there.
And if the woman be not willing to follow thee, then thou shall be clear from this my oath. Only thou shall not bring my son there again.
And the servant put his hand under the thigh of Abraham his master, and swore to him concerning this matter.
And the servant took ten camels, of the camels of his master, and departed, having all goodly things of his master's in his hand. And he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, to the city of Nahor.
And he made the camels to kneel down outside the city by the well of water at the time of evening, the time that women go out to draw water.
And he said, O Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, send me, I pray thee, good speed this day, and show kindness to my master Abraham.
Behold, I am standing by the fountain of water. And the daughters of the men of the city are coming out to draw water.
And let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink. And she shall say, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also. Let the same be she that thou have appointed for thy servant Isaac. And thereby I shall know that thou have shown kindness to my master.
And it came to pass, before he was done speaking, that, behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel the son of Milcah, the wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
And the damsel was very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither had any man known her. And she went down to the fountain, and filled her pitcher, and came up.
And the servant ran to meet her, and said, Give me to drink, I pray thee, a little water from thy pitcher.
And she said, Drink, my lord. And she hurried, and let down her pitcher upon her hand, and gave him drink.
And when she had finished giving him drink, she said, I will draw for thy camels also, until they have done drinking.
And she hurried, and emptied her pitcher into the trough, and ran again to the well to draw, and drew for all his camels.
And the man looked steadfastly on her, keeping silent, to know whether Jehovah had made his journey prosperous or not.
And it came to pass, as the camels had finished drinking, that the man took a golden ring of half a shekel weight, and two bracelets for her hands of ten shekels weight of gold,
and said, Whose daughter are thou? Tell me, I pray thee. Is there room in thy father's house for us to lodge in?
And she said to him, I am the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, whom she bore to Nahor.
She said moreover to him, We have both straw and provender enough, and room to lodge in.
And the man bowed his head, and worshiped Jehovah.
And he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, who has not forsaken his loving kindness and his truth toward my master. As for me, Jehovah has led me in the way to the house of my master's brothers.
And the damsel ran, and told her mother's house according to these words.
And Rebekah had a brother, and his name was Laban. And Laban ran out to the man, to the fountain.
And it came to pass, when he saw the ring, and the bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spoke the man to me, that he came to the man. And, behold, he was standing by the camels at the fountain.
And he said, Come in, thou blessed of Jehovah. Why do thou stand outside? For I have prepared the house, and room for the camels.
And the man came into the house, and he ungirded the camels. And he gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his feet and the feet of the men who were with him.
And there was set before him food to eat. But he said, I will not eat until I have told my errand. And he said, Speak on.
And he said, I am Abraham's servant.
And Jehovah has blessed my master greatly, and he has become great. And he has given him flocks and herds, and silver and gold, and men-servants and maid-servants, and camels and donkeys.
And Sarah my master's wife bore a son to my master when she was old. And has he given to him all that he has.
And my master made me swear, saying, Thou shall not take a wife for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell,
but thou shall go to my father's house, and to my kindred, and take a wife for my son.
And I said to my master, Perhaps the woman will not follow me.
And he said to me, Jehovah, before whom I walk, will send his agent with thee, and prosper thy way. And thou shall take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's house.
Then thou shall be clear from my oath, when thou come to my kindred. And if they do not give her to thee, thou shall be clear from my oath.
And I came this day to the fountain, and said, O Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, if thou do now prosper my way which I go,
behold, I am standing by the fountain of water, and let it come to pass, that the maiden who comes forth to draw, to whom I shall say, Give me, I pray thee, a little water from thy pitcher to drink,
and she shall say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw for thy camels, let the same be the woman whom Jehovah has appointed for my master's son.
And before I was done speaking in my heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on her shoulder. And she went down to the fountain, and drew. And I said to her, Let me drink, I pray thee.
And she made haste, and let down her pitcher from her shoulder, and said, Drink, and I will give thy camels drink also. So I drank, and she made the camels drink also.
And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter are thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah bore to him. And I put the ring upon her nose, and the bracelets upon her hands.
And I bowed my head, and worshiped Jehovah, and blessed Jehovah, the God of my master Abraham, who had led me in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter for his son.
And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell me. And if not, tell me, that I may turn to the right hand, or to the left.
Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing proceeds from Jehovah; we cannot speak to thee bad or good.
Behold, Rebekah is before thee, take her, and go, and let her be thy master's son's wife, as Jehovah has spoken.
And it came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words, he bowed himself down to the earth to Jehovah.
And the servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment, and gave them to Rebekah. He also gave precious things to her brother and to her mother.
And they ate and drank, he and the men who were with him, and tarried all night. And they rose up in the morning, and he said, Send me away to my master.
And her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us a few days, at the least ten. After that she shall go.
And he said to them, Do not hinder me, since Jehovah has prospered my way. Send me away that I may go to my master.
And they said, We will call the damsel, and inquire at her mouth.
And they called Rebekah, and said to her, Will thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.
And they sent Rebekah their sister away, and her nurse, and Abraham's servant, and his men.
And they blessed Rebekah, and said to her, Our sister, be thou the mother of thousands of ten thousands, and let thy seed possess the gate of those who hate them.
And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the camels, and followed the man. And the servant took Rebekah, and went his way.
And Isaac came from the way of Beer-lahai-roi, for he dwelt in the land of the South.
And Isaac went out to meditate in the field at the evening. And he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and, behold, there were camels coming.
And Rebekah lifted up her eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she alighted from the camel.
And she said to the servant, What man is this who walks in the field to meet us? And the servant said, It is my master. And she took her veil, and covered herself.
And the servant told Isaac all the things that he had done.
And Isaac brought her into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his wife, and he loved her. And Isaac was comforted after his mother's death.

And Abraham took another wife, and her name was Keturah.
And she bore him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah.
And Jokshan begot Sheba, and Dedan. And the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim.
Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah.
And Abraham gave all that he had to Isaac.
But to the sons of the concubines, that Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts. And he sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, to the east country.
And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life which he lived, a hundred seventy-five years.
And Abraham gave up the spirit, and died in a good old age, an old man, and full of years, and was gathered to his people.
And Isaac and Ishmael his sons buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre,
the field which Abraham purchased from the sons of Heth. There Abraham was buried, and Sarah his wife.
And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God blessed Isaac his son. And Isaac dwelt by Beer-lahai-roi.
Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son, whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bore to Abraham.
the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth, and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
and Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa,
Hadad, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah.
These are the sons of Ishmael, and these are their names, by their villages, and by their encampments, twelve princes according to their nations.
And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, a hundred and thirty-seven years. And he gave up the spirit and died, and was gathered to his people.
And they dwelt from Havilah to Shur which is before Egypt, as thou go toward Assyria. He abode opposite all his brothers.
Abraham begot Isaac.
And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Paddan-aram, the sister of Laban the Syrian, to be his wife.
And Isaac entreated Jehovah for his wife, because she was barren. And Jehovah was entreated by him, and Rebekah his wife conceived.
And the children struggled together within her. And she said, If it be so, why do I live? And she went to inquire of Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to her, Two nations are in thy womb, and two peoples shall be separated from thy bowels. And the one people shall be stronger than the other people. And the elder shall serve the younger.
And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold, there were twins in her womb.
And the first came forth red all over like a hairy garment, and they called his name Esau.
And after that his brother came forth, and his hand had hold on Esau's heel, and his name was called Jacob. And Isaac was sixty years old when she bore them.
And the boys grew. And Esau was a skilful hunter, a man of the field. And Jacob was a quiet man, dwelling in tents.
Now Isaac loved Esau, because he ate of his venison. And Rebekah loved Jacob.
And Jacob boiled pottage. And Esau came in from the field, and he was faint.
And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that same red pottage, for I am faint. Therefore his name was called Edom.
And Jacob said, First sell me thy birthright.
And Esau said, Behold, I am about to die, and what profit shall the birthright do to me?
And Jacob said, Swear to me first. And he swore to him, and he sold his birthright to Jacob.
And Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentils. And he ate and drank, and rose up, and went his way. So Esau despised his birthright.

And there was a famine in the land, besides the first famine that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went to Abimelech king of the Philistines, to Gerar.
And Jehovah appeared to him, and said, Do not go down into Egypt. Dwell in the land which I shall tell thee of.
Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will bless thee. For to thee, and to thy seed, I will give all these lands, and I will establish the oath that I swore to Abraham thy father.
And I will multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and will give to thy seed all these lands, and in thy seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed,
because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my order, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws.
And Isaac dwelt in Gerar.
And the men of the place asked him of his wife. And he said, She is my sister. For he feared to say, My wife, Lest, the men of the place should kill me for Rebekah, because she was fair to look upon.
And it came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac was playing with Rebekah his wife.
And Abimelech called Isaac, and said, Behold, she is certainly thy wife, and how did thou say, She is my sister? And Isaac said to him, Because I said, Lest I die because of her.
And Abimelech said, What is this thou have done to us? One of the people might easily have lain with thy wife, and thou would have brought guiltiness upon us.
And Abimelech ordered all the people, saying, He who touches this man or his wife shall surely be put to death.
And Isaac sowed in that land, and found in the same year a hundredfold. And Jehovah blessed him.
And the man became great, and grew more and more until he became very great.
And he had possessions of flocks, and possessions of herds, and a great household. And the Philistines envied him.
Now all the wells which his father's servants had dug in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines had stopped, and filled with soil.
And Abimelech said to Isaac, Go from us, for thou are much mightier than we.
And Isaac departed from there, and encamped in the valley of Gerar, and dwelt there.
And Isaac again dug the wells of water, which they had dug in the days of Abraham his father. For the Philistines had stopped them after the death of Abraham. And he called their names after the names by which his father had called them.
And Isaac's servants dug in the valley, and found there a well of springing water.
And the herdsmen of Gerar strove with Isaac's herdsmen, saying, The water is ours. And he called the name of the well Esek, because they contended with him.
And they dug another well, and they strove for that also. And he called the name of it Sitnah.
And he moved from there, and dug another well, and they did not strive for that. And he called the name of it Rehoboth. And he said, For now Jehovah has made room for us, and we shall be fruitful in the land.
And he went up from there to Beersheba.
And Jehovah appeared to him the same night, and said, I am the God of Abraham thy father. Fear not, for I am with thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant Abraham's sake.
And he built an altar there, and called upon the name of Jehovah, and pitched his tent there. And there Isaac's servants dug a well.
Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath his friend, and Phicol the captain of his army.
And Isaac said to them, Why have ye come to me, seeing ye hate me, and have sent me away from you?
And they said, We saw plainly that Jehovah was with thee. And we said, Let there now be an oath between us, even between us and thee. And let us make a covenant with thee,
that thou will do us no hurt, as we have not touched thee, and as we have done to thee nothing but good, and have sent thee away in peace. Thou are now the blessed of Jehovah.
And he made a feast for them, and they ate and drank.
And they rose up promptly in the morning, and swore one to another. And Isaac sent them away, and they departed from him in peace.
And it came to pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning the well which they had dug, and said to him, We have found water.
And he called it Shibah. Therefore the name of the city is Beersheba to this day.
And when Esau was forty years old he took to wife Judith the daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Basemath the daughter of Elon the Hittite.
And they were a bitterness of spirit to Isaac and to Rebekah.

And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his elder son, and said to him, My son. And he said to him, Here I am.
And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death.
Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take venison for me.
And make savory food for me, such as I love, and bring it to me, that I may eat, that my soul may bless thee before I die.
And Rebekah heard when Isaac spoke to Esau his son. And Esau went to the field to hunt for venison, and to bring it.
And Rebekah spoke to Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard thy father speak to Esau thy brother, saying,
Bring venison for me, and make savory food for me, that I may eat, and bless thee before Jehovah before my death.
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice according to that which I command thee.
Go now to the flock, and fetch me two good kids of the goats from there. And I will make them savory food for thy father, such as he loves.
And thou shall bring it to thy father, that he may eat, so that he may bless thee before his death.
And Jacob said to Rebekah his mother, Behold, Esau my brother is a hairy man, and I am a smooth man.
My father will perhaps feel me, and I shall seem to him as a deceiver. And I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing.
And his mother said to him, Upon me be thy curse, my son. Only obey my voice, and go fetch them for me.
And he went, and fetched, and brought them to his mother. And his mother made savory food, such as his father loved.
And Rebekah took the goodly garments of Esau her elder son, which were with her in the house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son.
And she put the skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of his neck.
And she gave the savory food and the bread, which she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.
And he came to his father, and said, My father. And he said, Here I am. Who are thou, my son?
And Jacob said to his father, I am Esau thy firstborn. I have done according as thou bade me. Arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And Isaac said to his son, How is it that thou have found it so quickly, my son? And he said, Because Jehovah thy God sent me good speed.
And Isaac said to Jacob, Come near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau or not.
And Jacob went near to Isaac his father. And he felt him, and said, The voice is Jacob's voice, but the hands are the hands of Esau.
And he did not discern him, because his hands were hairy as his brother Esau's hands. So he blessed him.
And he said, Are thou my very son Esau? And he said, I am.
And he said, Bring it near to me, and I will eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought it near to him, and he ate. And he brought wine to him, and he drank.
And his father Isaac said to him, Come near now, and kiss me, my son.
And he came near, and kissed him. And he smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field that Jehovah has blessed.
And God give thee of the dew of heaven, and of the fatness of the earth, and plenty of grain and new wine.
Let peoples serve thee, and nations bow down to thee. Be lord over thy brothers, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee. Cursed be he who curses thee, and blessed be he who blesses thee.
And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarcely gone out from the presence of Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
And he also made savory food, and brought it to his father. And he said to his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his son's venison, that thy soul may bless me.
And Isaac his father said to him, Who are thou? And he said, I am thy son, thy firstborn, Esau.
And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said, Who then is he who has taken venison, and brought it me, and I have eaten of all before thou came, and have blessed him? Yea, he shall be blessed.
When Esau heard the words of his father, he cried with an exceedingly great and bitter cry, and said to his father, Bless me, even me also, O my father.
And he said, Thy brother came with guile, and has taken away thy blessing.
And he said, Is not he rightly name Jacob? For he has supplanted me these two times. He took away my birthright, and, behold, now he has taken away my blessing. And he said, Have thou not reserved a blessing for me?
And Isaac answered and said to Esau, Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brothers I have given to him for servants, and I have sustained him with grain and new wine. And what then shall I do for thee, my son?
And Esau said to his father, Have thou but one blessing, my father? Bless me, even me also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept.
And Isaac his father answered and said to him, Behold, of the fatness of the earth shall be thy dwelling, and of the dew of heaven from above.
And by thy sword thou shall live, and thou shall serve thy brother. And it shall come to pass, when thou shall break loose, that thou shall shake his yoke from off thy neck.
And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing with which his father blessed him. And Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning for my father are at hand. Then I will kill my brother Jacob.
And the words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah. And she sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said to him, Behold, thy brother Esau comforts himself concerning thee, to kill thee.
Now therefore, my son, obey my voice, and arise, flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran.
And tarry with him a few days, until thy brother's fury turns away,
until thy brother's anger turns away from thee, and he forgets that which thou have done to him. Then I will send, and fetch thee from there. Why should I be bereaved of you both in one day?
And Rebekah said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth. If Jacob takes a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these, of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?

And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and ordered him, and said to him, Thou shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
Arise, go to Paddan-aram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's father, and take thee a wife from there of the daughters of Laban thy mother's brother.
And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou may be a company of peoples,
and give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed with thee, that thou may inherit the land of thy sojourning, which God gave to Abraham.
And Isaac sent Jacob away. And he went to Paddan-aram to Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian, the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.
Now Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob and sent him away to Paddan-aram, to take for him a wife from there, and that as he blessed him he gave him an order, saying, Thou shall not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan,
and that Jacob obeyed his father and his mother, and was gone to Paddan-aram.
And Esau saw that the daughters of Canaan did not please Isaac his father.
And Esau went to Ishmael, and took, besides the wives that he had, Mahalath the daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of Nebaioth, to be his wife.
And Jacob went out from Beersheba, and went toward Haran.
And he touched upon a certain place, and tarried there all night, because the sun was set. And he took one of the stones of the place, and put it under his head, and lay down in that place to sleep.
And he dreamed, and, behold, a ladder set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to heaven. And, behold, the agents of God ascending and descending on it.
And, behold, Jehovah stood above it, and said, I am Jehovah, the God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac. The land on which thou lie, to thee I will give it, and to thy seed.
And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, and thou shall spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to the south. And in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be blessed.
And, behold, I am with thee, and will keep thee wherever thou go, and will bring thee again into this land. For I will not leave thee, until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of.
And Jacob awoke out of his sleep, and he said, Surely Jehovah is in this place, and I did not know it.
And he was afraid, and said, How awesome is this place! This is none other than the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven.
And Jacob rose up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put under his head, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it.
And he called the name of that place Bethel, but the name of the city was Luz at first.
And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on,
so that I come again to my father's house in peace, and Jehovah will be my God,
then this stone, which I have set up for a pillar, shall be God's house. And of all that thou shall give me I will surely give the tenth to thee.

Then Jacob went on his journey, and came to the land of the sons of the east.
And he looked, and, behold, a well in the field. And, lo, three flocks of sheep were lying there by it, for they watered the flocks out of that well. And the stone upon the well's mouth was great.
And all the flocks were gathered there. And they rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put the stone again upon the well's mouth in its place.
And Jacob said to them, My brothers, where are ye from? And they said, We are of Haran.
And he said to them, Do ye know Laban the son of Nahor? And they said, We know him.
And he said to them, Is it well with him? And they said, It is well. And, behold, Rachel his daughter comes with the sheep.
And he said, Lo, it is yet high day, neither is it time that the cattle should be gathered together. Water ye the sheep, and go and feed them.
And they said, We cannot until all the flocks be gathered together, and they roll the stone from the well's mouth. Then we water the sheep.
While he was yet speaking with them, Rachel came with her father's sheep, for she kept them.
And it came to pass, when Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother's brother, and the sheep of Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his mother's brother.
And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his voice, and wept.
And Jacob told Rachel that he was her father's brother, and that he was Rebekah's son. And she ran and told her father.
And it came to pass, when Laban heard the news of Jacob his sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban all these things.
And Laban said to him, Surely thou are my bone and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month.
And Laban said to Jacob, Because thou are my brother, should thou therefore serve me for nothing? Tell me, what shall thy wages be?
And Laban had two daughters. The name of the elder was Leah, and the name of the younger was Rachel.
And Leah's eyes were weak, but Rachel was beautiful and well favored.
And Jacob loved Rachel, and he said, I will serve thee seven years for Rachel thy younger daughter.
And Laban said, It is better that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man. Abide with me.
And Jacob served seven years for Rachel. And they seemed to him but a few days, for the love he had for her.
And Jacob said to Laban, Give me my wife, for my days are fulfilled, that I may go in to her.
And Laban gathered together all the men of the place, and made a feast.
And it came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and brought her to him. And he went in to her.
And Laban gave Zilpah his handmaid to his daughter Leah for a handmaid.
And it came to pass in the morning that, behold, it was Leah. And he said to Laban, What is this thou have done to me? Did I not serve with thee for Rachel? Why then have thou beguiled me?
And Laban said, It is not so done in our place, to give the younger before the firstborn.
Fulfill the week of this one, and we will give thee the other also for the service which thou shall serve with me yet seven other years.
And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week. And he gave him Rachel his daughter to wife.
And Laban gave to Rachel, his daughter, Bilhah his handmaid to be her handmaid.
And he also went in to Rachel, and also he loved Rachel more than Leah, and served with him yet seven other years.
And Jehovah saw that Leah was regarded inferior, and he opened her womb, but Rachel was barren.
And Leah conceived, and bore a son, and she called his name Reuben. For she said, Because Jehovah has looked upon my affliction, for now my husband will love me.
And she conceived again, and bore a son, and said, Because Jehovah has heard that I am regarded inferior, he has therefore given me this son also. And she called his name Simeon.
And she conceived again, and bore a son, and said, Now this time my husband will be joined to me, because I have borne him three sons. Therefore his name was called Levi.
And she conceived again, and bore a son. And she said, This time I will praise Jehovah. Therefore she called his name Judah. And she left off bearing.

And when Rachel saw that she bore Jacob no sons, Rachel envied her sister, and she said to Jacob, Give me sons, or else I die.
And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel, and he said, Am I in God's stead, who has withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?
And she said, Behold, my maid Bilhah, go in to her, that she may bear upon my knees, and I also may obtain sons by her.
And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife, and Jacob went in to her.
And Bilhah conceived, and bore Jacob a son.
And Rachel said, God has judged me, and has also heard my voice, and has given me a son. Therefore she called his name Dan.
And Bilhah Rachel's handmaid conceived again, and bore Jacob a second son.
And Rachel said, With mighty wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and have prevailed. And she called his name Naphtali.
When Leah saw that she had left off bearing, she took Zilpah her handmaid, and gave her to Jacob to wife.
And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bore Jacob a son.
And Leah said, Fortunate! And she called his name Gad.
And Zilpah Leah's handmaid bore Jacob a second son.
And Leah said, Happy am I! For the daughters will call me happy. And she called his name Asher.
And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found mandrakes in the field, and brought them to his mother Leah. Then Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.
And she said to her, Is it a small matter that thou have taken away my husband? And would thou take away my son's mandrakes also? And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee tonight for thy son's mandrakes.
And Jacob came from the field in the evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in to me, for I have surely hired thee with my son's mandrakes. And he lay with her that night.
And God hearkened to Leah, and she conceived, and bore Jacob a fifth son.
And Leah said, God has given me my hire, because I gave my handmaid to my husband. And she called his name Issachar.
And Leah conceived again, and bore a sixth son to Jacob.
And Leah said, God has endowed me with a good dowry. Now my husband will dwell with me, because I have borne him six sons. And she called his name Zebulun.
And afterwards she bore a daughter, and called her name Dinah.
And God remembered Rachel. And God hearkened to her, and opened her womb.
And she conceived, and bore a son, and said, God has taken away my reproach.
And she called his name Joseph, saying, Jehovah adds another son to me.
And it came to pass, when Rachel had borne Joseph, that Jacob said to Laban, Send me away, that I may go to my own place, and to my country.
Give me my wives and my children for whom I have served thee, and let me go, for thou know my service with which I have served thee.
And Laban said to him, If now I have found favor in thine eyes, tarry, for I have learned by experience that Jehovah has blessed me for thy sake.
And he said, Appoint for me thy wages, and I will give it.
And he said to him, Thou know how I have served thee, and how thy cattle have fared with me.
For it was little which thou had before I came, and it has increased to a multitude, and Jehovah has blessed thee wherever I turned. And now when shall I provide for my own house also?
And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shall not give me anything. If thou will do this thing for me, I will again feed thy flock and keep it.
I will pass through all thy flock today, removing from there every speckled and spotted one, and every black one among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among the goats, and of such shall be my hire.
So shall my righteousness answer for me after this, when thou shall come concerning my hire that is before thee. Every one that is not speckled and spotted among the goats, and black among the sheep, that is with me, shall be considered stolen.
And Laban said, Behold, O that it might be according to thy word.
And he removed that day the he-goats that were ringstreaked and spotted, and all the she-goats that were speckled and spotted, every one that had white in it, and all the black ones among the sheep, and gave them into the hand of his sons.
And he set three days' journey between himself and Jacob. And Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.
And Jacob took for him rods of fresh poplar, and of the almond and of the plane tree, and peeled white streaks in them, and made the white which was in the rods appear.
And he set the rods which he had peeled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs where the flocks came to drink. And they conceived when they came to drink.
And the flocks conceived before the rods, and the flocks brought forth ringstreaked, speckled, and spotted.
And Jacob separated the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the ringstreaked and all the black in the flock of Laban. And he put his own herds apart, and did not put them near Laban's flock.
And it came to pass, whenever the stronger of the flock conceived, that Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the flock in the gutters, that they might conceive among the rods,
but when the flock were weak, he did not put them in. So the weaker were Laban's, and the stronger Jacob's.
And the man increased exceedingly, and had large flocks, and maid-servants and men-servants, and camels and donkeys.

And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob has taken away all that was our father's, and he has gotten all this glory of that which was our father's.
And Jacob beheld the countenance of Laban, and, behold, it was not toward him as beforetime.
And Jehovah said to Jacob, Return to the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred, and I will be with thee.
And Jacob sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field to his flock,
and said to them, I see your father's countenance, that it is not toward me as beforetime, but the God of my father has been with me.
And ye know that with all my power I have served your father.
And your father has deceived me, and changed my wages ten times, but God did not allow him to hurt me.
If he said thus, The speckled shall be thy wages, then all the flock bore speckled, and if he said thus, The ringstreaked shall be thy wages, then all the flock bore ringstreaked.
Thus God has taken away the cattle of your father, and given them to me.
And it came to pass at the time that the flock conceive, that I lifted up my eyes, and saw in a dream, and, behold, the he-goats which leaped upon the flock were ringstreaked, speckled, and grizzled.
And the agent of God said to me in the dream, Jacob. And I said, Here I am.
And he said, Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the he-goats which leap upon the flock are ringstreaked, speckled, and grizzled, for I have seen all that Laban does to thee.
I am the God of Bethel, where thou anointed a pillar, where thou vowed a vow to me. Now arise, get thee out from this land, and return to the land of thy nativity.
And Rachel and Leah answered and said to him, Is there yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?
Are we not accounted by him as foreigners? For he has sold us, and has also quite devoured our money.
For all the riches which God has taken away from our father, that is ours and our children's. Now then, whatever God has said to thee, do.
Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon the camels.
And he carried away all his cattle, and all his substance which he had gathered, the cattle of his getting, which he had gathered in Paddan-aram, to go to Isaac his father to the land of Canaan.
Now Laban was gone to shear his sheep, and Rachel stole the teraphim that were her father's.
And Jacob slipped away unawares to Laban the Syrian, in that he did not tell him that he fled.
So he fled with all that he had. And he rose up, and passed over the River, and set his face toward the mountain of Gilead.
And it was told Laban on the third day that Jacob had fled.
And he took his brothers with him, and pursued after him seven days' journey, and he overtook him in the mountain of Gilead.
And God came to Laban the Syrian in a dream of the night, and said to him, Take heed to thyself that thou not speak to Jacob either good or bad.
And Laban came up with Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in the mountain. And Laban encamped with his brothers in the mountain of Gilead.
And Laban said to Jacob, What have thou done, that thou have slipped away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters as captives of the sword?
Why did thou flee secretly, and creep away from me, and did not tell me, that I might have sent thee away with mirth and with songs, with tambourine and with harp,
and did not allow me to kiss my sons and my daughters? Now thou have done foolishly.
It is in the power of my hand to do you harm, but the God of your father spoke to me last night, saying, Take heed to thyself that thou not speak to Jacob either good or bad.
And now, though thou have certainly gone, because thou have been very desirous for thy father's house, yet why have thou stolen my gods?
And Jacob answered and said to Laban, Because I was afraid, for I said, Lest thou should take thy daughters from me by force.
With whomever thou find thy gods, he shall not live. Before our brothers discern thou what is thine with me, and take it to thee. For Jacob did not know that Rachel had stolen them.
And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and into Leah's tent, and into the tent of the two maid-servants, but he did not find them. And he went out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent.
Now Rachel had taken the teraphim, and put them in the camel's saddle, and sat upon them. And Laban felt around all the tent, but did not find them.
And she said to her father, Let not my lord be angry that I cannot rise up before thee, for the manner of women is upon me. And he searched, but did not find the teraphim.
And Jacob was angry, and chided with Laban. And Jacob answered and said to Laban, What is my trespass? What is my sin that thou have hotly pursued after me?
Whereas thou have felt around all my stuff, what have thou found of all thy household stuff? Set it here before my brothers and thy brothers, that they may judge between us two.
These twenty years I have been with thee, thy ewes and thy she-goats have not cast their young, and I have not eaten the rams of thy flocks.
I did not bring to thee that which was torn by beasts; I bore the loss of it, of my hand thou required it, whether stolen by day or stolen by night.
Thus I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night, and my sleep fled from my eyes.
These twenty years I have been in thy house. I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and six years for thy flock. And thou have changed my wages ten times.
Unless the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear of Isaac, had been with me, surely now thou would have sent me away empty. God has seen my affliction and the labor of my hands, and rebuked thee last night.
And Laban answered and said to Jacob, The daughters are my daughters, and the sons are my sons, and the flocks are my flocks, and all that thou see is mine. And what can I do this day to these my daughters, or to their sons whom they have borne?
And now come, let us make a covenant, I and thou, and let it be for a witness between me and thee.
And Jacob took a stone, and set it up for a pillar.
And Jacob said to his brothers, Gather stones, and they took stones, and made a heap. And they ate there by the heap.
And Laban called it Jegar-saha-dutha, but Jacob called it Galeed.
And Laban said, This heap is witness between me and thee this day. Therefore the name of it was called Galeed,
and Mizpah. For he said, May Jehovah watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from another,
if thou will afflict my daughters, and if thou will take wives besides my daughters, no man is with us, see, God is witness between me and thee.
And Laban said to Jacob, Behold this heap, and behold the pillar, which I have set between me and thee.
This heap is witness, and the pillar is witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou shall not pass over this heap and this pillar to me, for harm.
The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge between us. And Jacob swore by the fear of his father Isaac.
And Jacob offered a sacrifice on the mountain, and called his brothers to eat bread. And they ate bread, and tarried all night on the mountain.
And early in the morning Laban rose up, and kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them. And Laban departed and returned to his place.

And Jacob went on his way, and the agents of God met him.
And Jacob said when he saw them, This is God's camp. And he called the name of that place Mahanaim.
And Jacob sent messengers before him to Esau his brother to the land of Seir, the field of Edom.
And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye say to my lord Esau, Thus says thy servant Jacob, I have sojourned with Laban, and stayed until now.
And I have oxen, and donkeys, flocks, and men-servants, and maid-servants. And I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find favor in thy sight.
And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy brother Esau, and moreover he comes to meet thee, and four hundred men with him.
Then Jacob was greatly afraid and was distressed. And he divided the people that were with him, and the flocks, and the herds, and the camels, into two companies.
And he said, If Esau comes to the one company, and smites it, then the company which is left shall escape.
And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, O Jehovah, who said to me, Return to thy country, and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good,
I am not worthy of the least of all the loving kindnesses, and of all the truth, which thou have shown to thy servant, for with my staff I passed over this Jordan, and now I have become two companies.
Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau. For I fear him, lest he comes and smites me, the mother with the sons.
And thou said, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude.
two hundred she-goats and twenty he-goats, two hundred ewes and twenty rams,
thirty milk camels and their colts, forty cows and ten bulls, twenty she-donkeys and ten foals.
And he delivered them into the hand of his servants, every herd by itself, and said to his servants, Pass over before me, and put a space between herd and herd.
And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meets thee, and asks thee, saying, Whose are thou? And where do thou go? And whose are these before thee?
Then thou shall say, Thy servant Jacob's. It is a present sent to my lord Esau. And, behold, he also is behind us.
And he commanded also the second, and the third, and all who followed the herds, saying, On this manner shall ye speak to Esau when ye find him,
and ye shall say, Moreover, behold, thy servant Jacob is behind us. For he said, I will appease him with the present that goes before me, and afterward I will see his face. Perhaps he will accept me.
So the present passed over before him, and he himself lodged that night in the company.
And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and his two handmaids, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford of the Jabbok.
And he took them, and sent them over the stream, and sent over that which he had.
And Jacob was left alone, and a man wrestled with him until the breaking of the day.
And when he saw that he did not prevail against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh, and the hollow of Jacob's thigh was strained as he wrestled with him.
And he said, Let me go, for the day breaks. And he said, I will not let thee go unless thou bless me.
And he said to him, What is thy name? And he said, Jacob.
And he said, Thy name shall no more be called Jacob, but Israel, for thou have striven with God and with men, and have prevailed.
And Jacob asked him, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, thy name. And he said, Why is it that thou ask for my name? And he blessed him there.
And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel, for, I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved.
And the sun rose upon him as he passed over Penuel, and he limped upon his thigh.
Therefore the sons of Israel do not eat the sinew of the hip which is upon the hollow of the thigh, to this day, because he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew of the hip.

And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau was coming, and four hundred men with him. And he divided the children to Leah, and to Rachel, and to the two handmaids.
And he put the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children after, and Rachel and Joseph hindmost.
And he himself passed over before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came near to his brother.
And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him, and fell on his neck, and kissed him, and they wept.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children, and said, Who are these with thee? And he said, The children whom God has graciously given thy servant.
Then the handmaids came near, they and their children, and they bowed themselves.
And Leah also and her children came near, and bowed themselves. And afterward Joseph came near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves.
And he said, What do thou mean by all this company which I met? And he said, To find favor in the sight of my lord.
And Esau said, I have enough, my brother, let that which thou have be thine.
And Jacob said, No, I pray thee, if now I have found favor in thy sight, then receive my present at my hand, inasmuch as I have seen thy face, as any man would see the face of God, and thou were pleased with me.
Take, I pray thee, my gift that is brought to thee, because God has dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he urged him, and he took it.
And he said, Let us take our journey, and let us go, and I will go before thee.
And he said to him, My lord knows that the children are tender, and that the flocks and herds with me have their young, and if they overdrive them one day, all the flocks will die.
Let my lord, I pray thee, pass over before his servant, and I will lead on gently, according to the pace of the cattle that are before me and according to the pace of the children, until I come to my lord to Seir.
And Esau said, Let me now leave with thee some of the folks that are with me. And he said, What need is it? Let me find favor in the sight of my lord.
So Esau returned that day on his way to Seir.
And Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built for him a house, and made booths for his cattle. Therefore the name of the place is called Succoth.
And Jacob came in peace to the city of Shechem, which is in the land of Canaan, when he came from Paddan-aram, and encamped before the city.
And he bought the parcel of ground, where he had spread his tent, at the hand of the sons of Hamor, Shechem's father, for a hundred lambs.
And he erected an altar there, and called it El-Elohe-Israel.

And Dinah the daughter of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob, went out to see the daughters of the land.
And Shechem the son of Hamor the Hivite, the prince of the land, saw her. And he took her, and lay with her, and humbled her.
And his soul clung to Dinah the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spoke kindly to the damsel.
And Shechem spoke to his father Hamor, saying, Get me this damsel to wife.
Now Jacob heard that he had defiled Dinah his daughter. And his sons were with his cattle in the field, and Jacob held his peace until they came.
And Hamor the father of Shechem went out to Jacob to converse with him.
And the sons of Jacob came in from the field when they heard it. And the men were grieved, and they were very angry, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's daughter, which thing ought not to be done.
And Hamor conversed with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longs for your daughter. I pray you, give her to him to wife.
And make ye marriages with us; give your daughters to us, and take our daughters to you.
And ye shall dwell with us, and the land shall be before you. Dwell and trade ye in it, and get possessions for you in it.
And Shechem said to her father and to her brothers, Let me find favor in your eyes, and what ye shall say to me I will give.
Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according as ye shall say to me, but give me the damsel to wife.
And the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father with guile, and spoke, because he had defiled Dinah their sister,
and said to them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to a man who is uncircumcised, for that is a reproach to us.
If ye will be as we are, that every male of you be circumcised.
Then we will give our daughters to you, and we will take your daughters to us. And we will dwell with you, and we will become one people.
But if ye will not hearken to us, to be circumcised, then will we take our daughter, and we will be gone.
And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor's son.
And the young man did not delay to do the thing, because he had delight in Jacob's daughter. And he was honored above all the house of his father.
And Hamor and Shechem his son came to the gate of their city, and conversed with the men of their city, saying,
These men are peaceable with us, therefore let them dwell in the land, and trade in it, for, behold, the land is large enough for them. Let us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our daughters.
Only on this condition will the men consent to us to dwell with us, to become one people, if every male among us be circumcised, as they are circumcised.
Shall not their cattle and their substance and all their beasts be ours? Only let us consent to them, and they will dwell with us.
And all who went out of the gate of his city hearkened to Hamor and to Shechem his son, and every male was circumcised, all who went out of the gate of his city.
And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore, that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brothers, took each man his sword, and came upon the city unawares, and killed all the males.
And they killed Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went forth.
The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and plundered the city, because they had defiled their sister.
They took their flocks and their herds and their donkeys, and that which was in the city, and that which was in the field,
and all their wealth, and all their little ones and their wives, they took captive and made a prey, even all that was in the house.
And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have troubled me, to make me odious to the inhabitants of the land, among the Canaanites and the Perizzites. And, I being few in number, they will gather themselves together against me and smite me, and I shall be destroyed, I and my house.
And they said, Should he deal with our sister as with a harlot?

And God said to Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there, and make an altar there to God, who appeared to thee when thou fled from the face of Esau thy brother.
Then Jacob said to his household, and to all who were with him, Put away the foreign gods that are among you, and purify yourselves, and change your garments.
And let us arise, and go up to Bethel, and I will make there an altar to God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and was with me on the way which I went.
And they gave to Jacob all the foreign gods which were in their hand, and the rings which were in their ears. And Jacob hid them under the oak that was by Shechem.
And they journeyed, and a terror of God was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after the sons of Jacob.
So Jacob came to Luz, which is in the land of Canaan (the same is Bethel), he and all the people that were with him.
And he built there an altar, and called the place El-bethel, because God was revealed to him there, when he fled from the face of his brother.
And Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried below Bethel under the oak. And the name of it was called Allon-bacuth.
And God appeared to Jacob again, when he came from Paddan-aram, and blessed him.
And God said to him, Thy name is Jacob. Thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel.
And God said to him, I am God Almighty. Be fruitful and multiply. A nation and a company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy loins.
And the land which I gave to Abraham and Isaac, I will give it to thee, and I will give the land to thy seed after thee.
And God went up from him in the place where he spoke with him.
And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he spoke with him, a pillar of stone. And he poured out a drink offering on it, and poured oil on it.
And Jacob called the name of the place where God spoke with him, Bethel.
And they journeyed from Bethel. And there was still some distance to come to Ephrath, and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labor.
And it came to pass, when she was in hard labor, that the midwife said to her, Fear not, for now thou shall have another son.
And it came to pass, as her soul was departing (for she died), that she called his name Ben-oni, but his father called him Benjamin.
And Rachel died, and was buried on the way to Ephrath (the same is Bethlehem).
And Jacob set up a pillar upon her grave, the same is the Pillar of Rachel's grave to this day.
And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower of Eder.
And it came to pass, while Israel dwelt in that land, that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubine, and Israel heard of it. Now the sons of Jacob were twelve.
Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Zebulun.
Joseph and Benjamin.
Dan and Naphtali.
Gad and Asher. These are the sons of Jacob, who were born to him in Paddan-aram.
And Jacob came to Isaac his father to Mamre, to Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron), where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
And the days of Isaac were a hundred and eighty years.
And Isaac gave up the spirit, and died, and was gathered to his people, old and full of days. And Esau and Jacob his sons buried him.

Now these are the generations of Esau (the same is Edom).
Adah the daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, the daughter of Zibeon the Hivite,
and Basemath Ishmael's daughter, sister of Nebaioth.
And Adah bore to Esau Eliphaz, and Basemath bore Reuel,
and Oholibamah bore Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah. These are the sons of Esau, who were born to him in the land of Canaan.
And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his daughters, and all the souls of his house, and his cattle, and all his beasts, and all his possessions, which he had gathered in the land of Canaan, and went into a land away from his brother Jacob.
For their substance was too great for them to dwell together, and the land of their sojourning could not bear them because of their cattle.
And Esau dwelt in mount Seir. Esau is Edom.
Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Basemath the wife of Esau.
And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar, Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz.
And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz Esau's son, and she bore to Eliphaz Amalek. These are the sons of Adah, Esau's wife.
Nahath, and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah, These were the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife.
and she bore to Esau Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah.
chief Teman, chief Omar, chief Zepho, chief Kenaz,
chief Korah, chief Gatam, chief Amalek. These are the chiefs that came by Eliphaz in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Adah.
chief Nahath, chief Zerah, chief Shammah, chief Mizzah. These are the chiefs that came by Reuel in the land of Edom. These are the sons of Basemath, Esau's wife.
chief Jeush, chief Jalam, chief Korah. These are the chiefs that came by Oholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife.
These are the sons of Esau, and these are their chiefs. The same is Edom.
Lotan and Shobal and Zibeon and Anah,
and Dishon and Ezer and Dishan. These are the chiefs that came of the Horites, the sons of Seir in the land of Edom.
And the sons of Lotan were Hori and Heman. And Lotan's sister was Timna.
Alvan and Manahath and Ebal, Shepho and Onam.
Aiah and Anah. This is Anah who found the hot springs in the wilderness, as he fed the donkeys of Zibeon his father.
Dishon, and Oholibamah the daughter of Anah.
Hemdan and Eshban and Ithran and Cheran.
Bilhan and Zaavan and Akan.
Uz and Aran.
chief Lotan, chief Shobal, chief Zibeon, chief Anah,
chief Dishon, chief Ezer, chief Dishan. These are the chiefs that came from the Horites, according to their chiefs in the land of Seir.
And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom, before any king reigned over the sons of Israel.
And Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom, and the name of his city was Dinhabah.
And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead.
And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead. And the name of his city was Avith.
And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
And Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the River reigned in his stead.
And Shaul died, and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
And Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead. And the name of his city was Pau, and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.
chief Timnah, chief Alvah, chief Jetheth,
chief Aholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
chief Magdiel, chief Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom, according to their habitations in the land of their possession. This is Esau, the father of the Edomites.

And Jacob dwelt in the land of his father's sojourning, in the land of Canaan.
These are the generations of Jacob. Joseph, being seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with his brothers. And he was a lad with the sons of Bilhah, and with the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives, and Joseph brought the evil report of them to their father.
Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his sons, because he was the son of his old age. And he made for him a coat of many colors.
And his brothers saw that their father loved him more than all his brothers. And they hated him, and could not speak peaceably to him.
And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told it to his brothers, and they hated him yet the more.
And he said to them, Hear, I pray you, this dream which I have dreamed.
For, behold, we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright. And, behold, your sheaves came round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf.
And his brothers said to him, Shall thou indeed reign over us? Or shall thou indeed have dominion over us? And they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.
And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it to his brothers. And said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream again. And, behold, the sun and the moon and eleven stars made obeisance to me.
And he told it to his father, and to his brothers. And his father rebuked him, and said to him, What is this dream that thou have dreamed? Shall I and thy mother and thy brothers indeed come to bow down ourselves to thee to the earth?
And his brothers envied him, but his father kept the saying in mind.
And his brothers went to feed their father's flock in Shechem.
And Israel said to Joseph, Are not thy brothers feeding the flock in Shechem? Come, and I will send thee to them. And he said to him, Here I am.
And he said to him, Go now, see whether it is well with thy brothers, and well with the flock, and bring me word again. So he sent him out of the valley of Hebron, and he came to Shechem.
And a certain man found him, and, behold, he was wandering in the field. And the man asked him, saying, What do thou seek?
And he said, I am seeking my brothers. Tell me, I pray thee, where they are feeding.
And the man said, They are departed from here, for I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his brothers, and found them in Dothan.
And they saw him afar off. And before he came near to them, they conspired against him to kill him.
And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer comes.
Come now therefore, and let us kill him, and cast him into one of the pits. And we will say, An evil beast has devoured him. And we shall see what will become of his dreams.
And Reuben heard it, and delivered him out of their hand, and said, Let us not take his life.
And Reuben said to them, Shed no blood. Cast him into this pit that is in the wilderness, but lay no hand upon him, that he might deliver him out of their hand, to restore him to his father.
And it came to pass, when Joseph came to his brothers, that they stripped Joseph of his coat, the coat of many colors that was on him,
and they took him, and cast him into the pit. And the pit was empty; there was no water in it.
And they sat down to eat bread. And they lifted up their eyes and looked, and, behold, a caravan of Ishmaelites was coming from Gilead, with their camels bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry it down to Egypt.
And Judah said to his brothers, What profit is it if we kill our brother and conceal his blood?
Come, and let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and let not our hand be upon him, for he is our brother, our flesh. And his brothers hearkened to him.
And there passed by Midianites, merchantmen, and they drew and lifted Joseph up out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmaelites for twenty pieces of silver. And they brought Joseph into Egypt.
And Reuben returned to the pit, and, behold, Joseph was not in the pit. And he tore his clothes,
and he returned to his brothers, and said, The child is not, and I, where shall I go?
And they took Joseph's coat, and killed a he-goat, and dipped the coat in the blood.
And they sent the coat of many colors, and they brought it to their father, and said, We have found this. Know now whether it is thy son's coat or not.
And he knew it, and said, It is my son's coat. An evil beast has devoured him; Joseph is without doubt torn in pieces.
And Jacob tore his garments, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many days.
And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort him, but he refused to be comforted, and he said, For I will go down to Sheol to my son mourning. And his father wept for him.
And the Midianites sold him into Egypt to Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard.

And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from his brothers, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name was Hirah.
And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite whose name was Shua. And he took her, and went in to her.
And she conceived, and bore a son, and he called his name Er.
And she conceived again, and bore a son, and she called his name Onan.
And she yet again bore a son, and called his name Shelah. And he was at Chezib, when she bore him.
And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn, and her name was Tamar.
And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of Jehovah, and Jehovah killed him.
And Judah said to Onan, Go in to thy brother's wife, and perform the duty of a husband's brother to her, and raise up seed to thy brother.
And Onan knew that the seed would not be his. And it came to pass, when he went in to his brother's wife, that he spilled it on the ground, lest he should give seed to his brother.
And the thing which he did was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and he killed him also.
Then Judah said to Tamar his daughter-in-law, Remain a widow in thy father's house, till Shelah my son be grown up, for he said, Lest he also die, like his brothers. And Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house.
And in process of time Shua's daughter, the wife of Judah, died. And Judah was comforted, and went up to his sheep shearers to Timnah, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite.
And it was told Tamar, saying, Behold, thy father-in-law goes up to Timnah to shear his sheep.
And she put the garments of her widowhood off from her, and covered herself with her veil, and wrapped herself, and sat in the gate of Enaim, which is by the way to Timnah, for she saw that Shelah was grown up, and she was not given to him to wife.
When Judah saw her, he thought her to be a harlot, for she had covered her face.
And he turned to her by the way, and said, Come, I pray thee, let me come in to thee, for he did not know that she was his daughter-in-law. And she said, What will thou give me, that thou may come in to me?
And he said, I will send thee a kid of the goats from the flock. And she said, Will thou give me a pledge, till thou send it?
And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she said, Thy signet and thy cord, and thy staff that is in thy hand. And he gave them to her, and came in to her, and she conceived by him.
And she arose, and went away, and put off her veil from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood.
And Judah sent the kid of the goats by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive the pledge from the woman's hand, but he did not find her.
Then he asked the men of her place, saying, Where is the prostitute, who was at Enaim by the wayside? And they said, There has been no prostitute here.
And he returned to Judah, and said, I have not found her, and also the men of the place said, There has been no prostitute here.
And Judah said, Let her take it to her, lest we be put to shame. Behold, I sent this kid, and thou have not found her.
And it came to pass about three months after, that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter-in-law has played the harlot, and moreover, behold, she is with child by whoredom. And Judah said, Bring her forth, and let her be burnt.
When she was brought forth, she sent to her father-in-law, saying, By the man, whose these are, I am with child. And she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose these are, the signet, and the cords, and the staff.
And Judah acknowledged them, and said, She is more righteous than I, inasmuch as I did not give her to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no more.
And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that, behold, twins were in her womb.
And it came to pass, when she travailed, that one put out a hand. And the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first.
And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold, his brother came out. And she said, Why have thou made a breach for thyself? Therefore his name was called Perez.
And afterward his brother came out, who had the scarlet thread upon his hand. And his name was called Zerah.

And Joseph was brought down to Egypt. And Potiphar, an officer of Pharaoh's, the captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him from the hand of the Ishmaelites, who had brought him down there.
And Jehovah was with Joseph. And he was a man who succeeds. And he was in the house of his master the Egyptian.
And his master saw that Jehovah was with him, and that Jehovah made all that he did to prosper in his hand.
And Joseph found favor in his sight, and he ministered to him. And he made him overseer over his house, and all that he had he put into his hand.
And it came to pass from the time that he made him overseer in his house, and over all that he had, that Jehovah blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake. And the blessing of Jehovah was upon all that he had, in the house and in the field.
And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand, and he knew nothing that was with him, save the bread which he ate. And Joseph was comely, and well-favored.
And it came to pass, after these things, that his master's wife cast her eyes upon Joseph, and she said, Lie with me.
But he refused, and said to his master's wife, Behold, my master does not know what is with me in the house, and he has put all that he has into my hand.
He is not greater in this house than I, nor has he kept back anything from me but thee, because thou are his wife. How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?
And it came to pass, as she spoke to Joseph day by day, that he did not hearken to her, to lie by her, or to be with her.
And it came to pass, about this time, that he went into the house to do his work, and there was none of the men of the house there inside.
And she caught him by his garment, saying, Lie with me. And he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and got out.
And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left his garment in her hand, and was fled forth,
that she called to the men of her house, and spoke to them, saying, See, he has brought in a Hebrew to us to mock us. He came in to me to lie with me, and I cried with a loud voice.
And it came to pass, when he heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment by me, and fled, and got out.
And she laid up his garment by her until his master came home.
And she spoke to him according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, whom thou have brought to us, came in to me to mock me.
And it came to pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment by me, and fled out.
And it came to pass, when his master heard the words of his wife, which she spoke to him, saying, After this manner did thy servant to me, that his wrath was kindled.
And Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison, the place where the king's prisoners were bound. And he was there in the prison.
But Jehovah was with Joseph, and showed kindness to him, and gave him favor in the sight of the keeper of the prison.
And the keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners who were in the prison. And whatever they did there, he was the doer of it.
The keeper of the prison did not look to anything that was under his hand, because Jehovah was with him, and that which he did, Jehovah made it prosper.

And it came to pass after these things, that the butler of the king of Egypt, and his baker, offended their lord the king of Egypt.
And Pharaoh was angry against his two officers, against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.
And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound.
And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he ministered to them. And they continued a season in ward.
And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream, in one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, who were bound in the prison.
And Joseph came in to them in the morning, and saw them, and, behold, they were sad.
And he asked Pharaoh's officers who were with him in ward in his master's house, saying, Why do ye look so sad today?
And they said to him, We have dreamed a dream, and there is no man who can interpret it. And Joseph said to them, Do not interpretations belong to God? Tell it to me, I pray you.
And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine was before me.
And in the vine were three branches. And it was as though it budded, and its blossoms shot forth, and the clusters of it brought forth ripe grapes.
And Pharaoh's cup was in my hand, and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand.
The three branches are three days.
Within yet three days Pharaoh shall lift up thy head, and restore thee to thine office. And thou shall give Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former manner when thou was his butler.
But have me in thy remembrance when it shall be well with thee, and show kindness, I pray thee, to me, and make mention of me to Pharaoh, and bring me out of this house.
For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews, and here also I have done nothing that they should put me into the dungeon.
When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good, he said to Joseph, I also was in my dream, and, behold, three baskets of white bread were on my head.
And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of baked food for Pharaoh, and the birds ate them out of the basket upon my head.
The three baskets are three days.
Within yet three days Pharaoh shall lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree, and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.
And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday, that he made a feast to all his servants. And he lifted up the head of the chief butler and the head of the chief baker among his servants.
And he restored the chief butler to his butlership again, and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand,
but he hanged the chief baker, as Joseph had interpreted to them.
Yet the chief butler did not remember Joseph, but forgot him.

And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that Pharaoh dreamed. And, behold, he stood by the river.
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven cows, well-favored and fat-fleshed, and they fed in the reed grass.
And, behold, seven other cows came up after them out of the river, ill-favored and lean-fleshed, and stood by the other cows upon the brink of the river.
And the ill-favored and lean-fleshed cows ate up the seven well-favored and fat cows. So Pharaoh awoke.
And he slept and dreamed a second time. And, behold, seven ears of grain came up upon one stalk, fat and good.
And, behold, seven ears, thin and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them.
And the thin ears swallowed up the seven fat and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke, and, behold, it was a dream.
And it came to pass in the morning, that his spirit was troubled, and he sent and called for all the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men of it. And Pharaoh told them his dream, but there was no man who could interpret them to Pharaoh.
Then the chief butler spoke to Pharaoh, saying, I do remember my faults this day.
Pharaoh was angry with his servants, and put me in ward in the house of the captain of the guard, me and the chief baker.
And we dreamed a dream in one night, I and he, we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his dream.
And there was a young man with us there, a Hebrew, servant to the captain of the guard, and we told him. And he interpreted to us our dreams. He interpreted to each man according to his dream.
And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it was; he restored me to my office, and he hanged him.
Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph. And they brought him hastily out of the dungeon, and he shaved himself, and changed his raiment, and came in to Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and there is no man who can interpret it. And I have heard say of thee, that when thou hear a dream thou can interpret it.
And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, It is not in me. God will give Pharaoh an answer of peace.
And Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the brink of the river.
And, behold, there came up out of the river seven cows, fat-fleshed and well-favored, and they fed in the reed grass.
And, behold, seven other cows came up after them, poor and very ill-favored and lean-fleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt for badness.
And the lean and ill-favored cows ate up the first seven fat cows.
And when they had eaten them up, it could not be known that they had eaten them, but they were still ill-favored, as at the beginning. So I awoke.
And I saw in my dream, and, behold, seven ears came up upon one stalk, full and good.
And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, and blasted with the east wind, sprung up after them,
and the thin ears swallowed up the seven good ears. And I told it to the magicians, but there was no man who could declare it to me.
And Joseph said to Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh is one; what God is about to do he has declared to Pharaoh.
The seven good cows are seven years, and the seven good ears are seven years; the dream is one.
And the seven lean and ill-favored cows that came up after them are seven years, and also the seven empty ears blasted with the east wind, they shall be seven years of famine.
That is the thing which I spoke to Pharaoh. What God is about to do he has shown to Pharaoh.
Behold, there come seven years of great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt,
and there shall arise after them seven years of famine. And all the plenty shall be forgotten in the land of Egypt, and the famine shall consume the land.
And the plenty shall not be known in the land because of that famine which follows, for it shall be very grievous.
And because the dream was doubled to Pharaoh, it is because the thing is established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass.
Now therefore let Pharaoh look out for a man discreet and wise, and set him over the land of Egypt.
Let Pharaoh do this, and let him appoint overseers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land of Egypt in the seven plentiful years.
And let them gather all the food of these good years that come, and lay up grain under the hand of Pharaoh for food in the cities, and let them keep it.
And the food shall be for a store to the land against the seven years of famine, which shall be in the land of Egypt, that the land not perish through the famine.
And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of all his servants.
And Pharaoh said to his servants, Can we find such a one as this, a man in whom is the spirit of God?
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, Inasmuch as God has shown thee all of this, there is none so discreet and wise as thou.
Thou shall be over my house, and according to thy word all my people shall be ruled. Only in the throne I will be greater than thou.
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh took his signet ring from off his hand, and put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck.
And he made him to ride in the second chariot which he had, and they cried before him, Bow the knee. And he set him over all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh said to Joseph, I am Pharaoh, and without thee no man shall lift up his hand or his foot in all the land of Egypt.
And Pharaoh called Joseph's name Zaphenath-paneah, and he gave him Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera priest of On, for a wife. And Joseph went out over the land of Egypt.
And Joseph was thirty years old when he stood before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt.
And in the seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls.
And he gathered up all the food of the seven years which were in the land of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities. The food of the field, which was round about every city, he laid up in the same.
And Joseph laid up grain as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left off numbering, for it was without number.
And two sons were born to Joseph before the year of famine came, whom Asenath, the daughter of Potiphera priest of On, bore to him.
And Joseph called the name of the firstborn Manasseh, for God has made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house.
And the name of the second he called Ephraim, for God has made me fruitful in the land of my affliction.
And the seven years of plenty, that was in the land of Egypt, came to an end.
And the seven years of famine began to come, according as Joseph had said. And there was famine in all lands, but in all the land of Egypt there was bread.
And when all the land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread. And Pharaoh said to all the Egyptians, Go to Joseph; what he says to you, do.
And the famine was over all the face of the earth. And Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold to the Egyptians. And the famine was severe in the land of Egypt.
And all countries came into Egypt to Joseph to buy grain, because the famine was severe on all the earth.

Now Jacob saw that there was grain in Egypt. And Jacob said to his sons, Why do ye look one upon another?
And he said, Behold, I have heard that there is grain in Egypt. Get you down there, and buy for us from there, that we may live, and not die.
And Joseph's ten brothers went down to buy grain from Egypt.
But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob did not send with his brothers, for he said, Lest perhaps harm befall him.
And the sons of Israel came to buy among those who came, for the famine was in the land of Canaan.
And Joseph was the governor over the land. It was he who sold to all the people of the land. And Joseph's brothers came, and bowed down themselves to him with their faces to the earth.
And Joseph saw his brothers, and he knew them, but made himself foreign to them, and spoke roughly with them. And he said to them. From where come ye? And they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food.
And Joseph knew his brothers, but they did not know him.
And Joseph remembered the dreams which he dreamed of them. And said to them, Ye are spies; ye have come to see the nakedness of the land.
And they said to him, No, my lord, but thy servants have come to buy food.
We are all one man's sons. We are true men. Thy servants are no spies.
And he said to them, No, but ye have come to see the nakedness of the land.
And they said, We thy servants are twelve brothers, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan. And, behold, the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not.
And Joseph said to them, This is that which I spoke to you, saying, Ye are spies.
By the life of Pharaoh ye shall not go forth from here unless your youngest brother comes here.
Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother. And ye shall be bound, that your words may be proved, whether there be truth in you, or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye are spies.
And he put them all together into ward three days.
If ye be true men, let one of your brothers be bound in your prison house, but go ye, carry grain for the famine of your houses,
and bring your youngest brother to me. So shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did so.
And they said one to another, We are truly guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the distress of his soul when he besought us, and we would not hear. Therefore this distress has come upon us.
And Reuben answered them, saying, Did I not speak to you, saying, Sin not against the child, and ye would not hear? Therefore also, behold, his blood is required.
And they did not know that Joseph understood them, for there was an interpreter between them.
And he turned himself around from them, and wept. And he returned to them, and spoke to them, and took Simeon from among them, and bound him before their eyes.
Then Joseph commanded to fill their vessels with grain, and to restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provisions for the way. And thus it was done to them.
And they loaded their donkeys with their grain, and departed from there.
And as one of them opened his sack to give his donkey provender in the lodging place, he saw his money, and, behold, it was in the mouth of his sack.
And he said to his brothers, My money is restored, and, lo, it is even in my sack. And their heart failed them, and they turned trembling one to another, saying, What is this that God has done to us?
And they came to Jacob their father to the land of Canaan, and told him all that had befallen them, saying,
The man, the lord of the land, spoke roughly with us, and took us for spies of the country.
And we said to him, We are true men, and we are no spies.
We are twelve brothers, sons of our father. One is not, and the youngest is this day with our father in the land of Canaan.
And the man, the lord of the land, said to us, By this I shall know that ye are true men. Leave one of your brothers with me, and take grain for the famine of your houses, and go your way,
and bring your youngest brother to me. Then I shall know that ye are no spies, but that ye are true men. So I will deliver your brother to you, and ye shall trade in the land.
And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that, behold, every man's bundle of money was in his sack. And when they and their father saw their bundles of money, they were afraid.
And Jacob their father said to them, Ye have bereaved me of my sons. Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and ye will take Benjamin away. All these things are against me.
And Reuben spoke to his father, saying, Kill my two sons if I do not bring him to thee. Deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.
And he said, My son shall not go down with you, for his brother is dead, and he only is left. If harm befalls him by the way in which ye go, then ye will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to Sheol.

And the famine was severe in the land.
And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the grain which they had brought out of Egypt, their father said to them, Go again, buy us a little food.
And Judah spoke to him, saying, The man solemnly protested to us, saying, Ye shall not see my face unless your brother be with you.
If thou will send our brother with us, we will go down and buy food for thee,
but if thou will not send him, we will not go down. For the man said to us, Ye shall not see my face unless your brother be with you.
And Israel said, Why did ye deal so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother?
And they said, The man asked diligently concerning ourselves, and concerning our kindred, saying, Is your father yet alive? Have ye another brother? And we told him according to the tenor of these words. Could we in any way know that he would say, Bring your brother down?
And Judah said to Israel his father, Send the young man with me, and we will arise and go, that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little ones.
I will be surety for him, of my hand shall thou require him. If I do not bring him to thee, and set him before thee, then let me bear the blame forever.
For unless we had lingered, surely we would have now returned a second time.
Take of the choice fruits of the land in your vessels, and carry a present down to the man, a little balm, and a little honey, spicery and myrrh, nuts, and almonds.
And take double money in your hand, and the money that was returned in the mouth of your sacks carry again in your hand. Perhaps it was an oversight.
Also take your brother, and arise, go again to the man.
And God Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may release to you your other brother and Benjamin. And if I be bereaved of my sons, I am bereaved.
And the men took that present, and they took double money in their hand, and Benjamin, and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph.
And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the steward of his house, Bring the men into the house, and kill, and make ready, for the men shall dine with me at noon.
And the man did as Joseph bade, and the man brought the men to Joseph's house.
And the men were afraid, because they were brought to Joseph's house, and they said, We are brought in because of the money that was returned in our sacks at the first time, that he may seek occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our donkeys.
And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and they spoke to him at the door of the house,
and said, Oh, my lord, we indeed came down at the first time to buy food.
And it came to pass, when we came to the lodging place, that we opened our sacks, and, behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight. And we have brought it again in our hand.
And we have brought other money down in our hand to buy food. We know not who put our money in our sacks.
And he said, Peace be to you, fear not. Your God, and the God of your father, has given you treasure in your sacks. I had your money. And he brought Simeon out to them.
And the man brought the men into Joseph's house, and gave them water, and they washed their feet. And he gave their donkeys provender.
And they made ready the present against Joseph's coming at noon, for they heard that they should eat bread there.
And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house, and bowed down themselves to him to the earth.
And he asked them of their welfare, and said, Is your father well, the old man of whom ye spoke? Is he yet alive?
And they said, Thy servant our father is well; he is yet alive. And they bowed the head, and made obeisance.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw Benjamin his brother, his mother's son, and said, Is this your youngest brother, of whom ye spoke to me? And he said, God be gracious to thee, my son.
And Joseph made haste, for his heart yearned over his brother, and he sought where to weep. And he entered into his chamber, and wept there.
And he washed his face, and came out. And he restrained himself, and said, Set on bread.
And they set on for him by himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, who ate with him, by themselves, because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews, for that is an abomination to the Egyptians.
And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his birthright, and the youngest according to his youth. And the men marveled one with another.
And he took and sent portions to them from before him, but Benjamin's portion was five times so much as any of theirs. And they drank, and were merry with him.

And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's money in his sack's mouth.
And put my cup, the silver cup, in the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his grain money. And he did according to the word that Joseph had spoken.
As soon as the morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their donkeys.
And when they were gone out of the city, and were not yet far off, Joseph said to his steward, Up, follow after the men, and when thou overtake them, say to them, Why have ye rewarded evil for good?
Is not this that in which my lord drinks, and how he indeed divines? Ye have done evil in so doing.
And he overtook them, and he spoke to them these words.
And they said to him, Why does my lord speak such words as these? Far be it from thy servants that they should do such a thing.
Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we brought again to thee out of the land of Canaan. How then would we steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold?
With whomever of thy servants it be found, let him die, and we also will be my lord's bondmen.
And he said, Now also let it be according to your words. He with whom it is found shall be my bondman, and ye shall be blameless.
Then they hurried, and took down every man his sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack.
And he searched, and began at the eldest, and left off at the youngest. And the cup was found in Benjamin's sack.
Then they tore their clothes, and every man loaded his donkey, and returned to the city.
And Judah and his brothers came to Joseph's house. And he was yet there, and they fell before him on the ground.
And Joseph said to them, What deed is this that ye have done? Know ye not that such a man as I can indeed divine?
And Judah said, What shall we say to my lord? What shall we speak, or how shall we clear ourselves? God has found out the iniquity of thy servants. Behold, we are my lord's bondmen, both we, and he also in whose hand the cup is found.
And he said, Far be it from me that I should do so. The man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my bondman, but as for you, get you up in peace to your father.
Then Judah came near to him, and said, Oh, my lord, let thy servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thine anger burn against thy servant, for thou are even as Pharaoh.
My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?
And we said to my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a child of his old age, a little one. And his brother is dead, and he alone is left of his mother, and his father loves him.
And thou said to thy servants, Bring him down to me, that I may set my eyes upon him.
And we said to my lord, The young man cannot leave his father, for if he should leave his father, his father would die.
And thou said to thy servants, Unless your youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.
And it came to pass when we came up to thy servant my father, we told him the words of my lord.
And our father said, Go again, buy us a little food.
And we said, We cannot go down. If our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down, for we may not see the man's face unless our youngest brother be with us.
And thy servant my father said to us, Ye know that my wife bore me two sons.
And the one went out from me, and I said, Surely he is torn in pieces, and I have not seen him since.
And if ye take this one also from me, and harm befall him, ye will bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to Sheol.
Now therefore when I come to thy servant my father, and the young man is not with us, since his life is bound up in the young man's life,
it will come to pass, when he sees that the young man is not with us, that he will die. And thy servants will bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with sorrow to Sheol.
For thy servant became surety for the young man to my father, saying, If I do not bring him to thee, then I shall bear the blame to my father forever.
Now therefore, let thy servant, I pray thee, abide a bondman to my lord instead of the young man, and let the young man go up with his brothers.
For how shall I go up to my father, if the young man be not with me? Lest I see the evil that shall come on my father.

Then Joseph could not restrain himself before all those who stood before him, and he cried out, Cause every man to go out from me. And no man stood with him while Joseph made himself known to his brothers.
And he wept aloud, and the Egyptians heard, and the house of Pharaoh heard.
And Joseph said to his brothers, I am Joseph, does my father yet live? And his brothers could not answer him, for they were troubled at his presence.
And Joseph said to his brothers, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near, and he said, I am Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt.
And now be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me here, for God sent me before you to preserve life.
For the famine has been in the land these two years, and there are yet five years, in which there shall be neither plowing nor harvest.
And God sent me before you to preserve for you a remnant on the earth, and to save you alive by a great deliverance.
So now it was not you that sent me here, but God, and he has made me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and ruler over all the land of Egypt.
God has made me lord of all Egypt. Come down to me, delay not.
And thou shall dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shall be near to me, thou, and thy sons, and thy sons' sons, and thy flocks, and thy herds, and all that thou have.
And there will I nourish thee, for there are yet five years of famine, lest thou come to poverty, thou, and thy household, and all that thou have.
And, behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaks to you.
And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen. And ye shall hasten and bring down my father here.
And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept, and Benjamin wept upon his neck.
And he kissed all his brothers, and wept upon them. And after that his brothers talked with him.
And the report of it was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying, Joseph's brothers have come. And it pleased Pharaoh well, and his servants.
Load your beasts, and go, get you to the land of Canaan,
and take your father and your households, and come to me. And I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat of the land.
Take wagons for you out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your wives, and bring your father, and come.
Also do not regard your stuff, for the good of all the land of Egypt is yours.
And the sons of Israel did so. And Joseph gave them wagons, according to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way.
He gave to all of them, each man, changes of raiment, but to Benjamin he gave three hundred pieces of silver, and five changes of raiment.
ten donkeys laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten she-donkeys laden with grain and bread and provision for his father by the way.
So he sent his brothers away, and they departed. And he said to them, See that ye not fall out by the way.
And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of Canaan to Jacob their father.
And they told him, saying, Joseph is yet alive, and he is ruler over all the land of Egypt. And his heart fainted, for he did not believe them.
And they told him all the words of Joseph, which he had said to them. And when he saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob their father revived.
And Israel said, It is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive. I will go and see him before I die.

And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to Beersheba, and offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac.
And God spoke to Israel in the visions of the night, and said, Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here I am.
And he said, I am God, the God of thy father. Fear not to go down into Egypt, for I will there make of thee a great nation.
I will go down with thee into Egypt, and I will also surely bring thee up again, and Joseph shall put his hand upon thine eyes.
And Jacob rose up from Beersheba, and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry him.
the sons, and the sons of his sons with him, his daughters, and the daughters of his daughters. And he brought all his seed into Egypt.
Reuben, Jacob's firstborn.
Hanoch, and Pallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.
Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman.
Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Perez, and Zerah. But Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of Perez were Hezron and Hamul.
Tola, and Puvah, and Iob, and Shimron.
Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
These are the sons of Leah, whom she bore to Jacob in Paddan-aram, with his daughter Dinah. All the souls of his sons and his daughters were thirty-three.
Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon, Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.
Heber, and Malchiel.
These are the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to Leah his daughter; and these she bore to Jacob, even sixteen souls.
Joseph and Benjamin.
And to Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and Ephraim, whom Asenath, the daughter of Poti-phera priest of On, bore to him.
Bela, and Becher, and Ashbel, Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard.
all the souls were fourteen.
Hushim.
Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shillem.
These are the sons of Bilhah, whom Laban gave to Rachel his daughter, and these she bore to Jacob. All the souls were seven.
All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt, that came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls were sixty-six.
And the sons of Joseph, who were born to him in Egypt, were two souls. All the souls of the house of Jacob, that came into Egypt, were seventy.
And he sent Judah before him to Joseph, to show the way before him to Goshen, and they came into the land of Goshen.
And Joseph made his chariot ready, and went up to meet Israel his father, to Goshen. And he presented himself to him, and fell on his neck, and wept on his neck a good while.
And Israel said to Joseph, Now let me die, since I have seen thy face, that thou are yet alive.
And Joseph said to his brothers, and to his father's house, I will go up, and tell Pharaoh, and will say to him, My brothers, and my father's house, who were in the land of Canaan, have come to me.
And the men are shepherds, for they have been keepers of cattle, and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have.
And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall call you, and shall say, What is your occupation?
that ye shall say, Thy servants have been keepers of cattle from our youth even until now, both we, and our fathers, that ye may dwell in the land of Goshen, for every shepherd is an abomination to the Egyptians.

Then Joseph went in and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my brothers, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have, have come out of the land of Canaan. And, behold, they are in the land of Goshen.
And he took five men from among his brothers, and presented them to Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said to his brothers, What is your occupation? And they said to Pharaoh, Thy servants are shepherds, both we, and our fathers.
And they said to Pharaoh, We have come to sojourn in the land, for there is no pasture for thy servants' flocks, for the famine is severe in the land of Canaan. Now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants dwell in the land of Goshen.
And Pharaoh spoke to Joseph, saying, Thy father and thy brothers have come to thee.
The land of Egypt is before thee. Make thy father and thy brothers to dwell in the best of the land; in the land of Goshen let them dwell. And if thou know any able men among them, then make them rulers over my cattle.
And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him before Pharaoh, and Jacob blessed Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh said to Jacob, How many are the days of the years of thy life?
And Jacob said to Pharaoh, The days of the years of my pilgrimage are a hundred and thirty years. Few and evil have been the days of the years of my life, and they have not attained to the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the days of their pilgrimage.
And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went out from the presence of Pharaoh.
And Joseph placed his father and his brothers, and gave them a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded.
And Joseph nourished his father, and his brothers, and all his father's household, with bread, according to their families.
And there was no bread in all the land, for the famine was very severe, so that the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan fainted by reason of the famine.
And Joseph gathered up all the money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, for the grain which they bought. And Joseph brought the money into Pharaoh's house.
And when the money was all spent in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came to Joseph, and said, Give us bread, for why should we die in thy presence? For our money fails.
And Joseph said, Give your cattle, and I will give you for your cattle, if money fails.
And they brought their cattle to Joseph. And Joseph gave them bread in exchange for the horses, and for the flocks, and for the herds, and for the donkeys. And he fed them with bread in exchange for all their cattle for that year.
And when that year was ended, they came to him the second year, and said to him, We will not hide from my lord, how that our money is all spent, and the herds of cattle are my lord's; there is nothing left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands.
Why should we die before thine eyes, both we and our land? Buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants to Pharaoh. And give us seed, that we may live, and not die, and that the land not be desolate.
So Joseph bought all the land of Egypt for Pharaoh. For the Egyptians, every man, sold his field, because the famine was severe upon them. And the land became Pharaoh's.
And as for the people, he moved them to the cities from one end of the border of Egypt even to the other end of it.
Only he did not buy the land of the priests, for the priests had a portion from Pharaoh, and ate their portion which Pharaoh gave them. Therefore they did not sell their land.
Then Joseph said to the people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh. Lo, here is seed for you, and ye shall sow the land.
And it shall come to pass at the ingatherings, that ye shall give a fifth to Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field, and for your food, and for those of your households, and for food for your little ones.
And they said, Thou have saved our lives. Let us find favor in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's servants.
And Joseph made it a statute concerning the land of Egypt to this day, that Pharaoh should have the fifth. Only the land of the priests alone did not become Pharaoh's.
And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the land of Goshen. And they got possessions in it, and were fruitful, and multiplied exceedingly.
And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen years. So the days of Jacob, the years of his life, were a hundred forty-seven years.
And the time drew near that Israel must die. And he called his son Joseph, and said to him, If now I have found favor in thy sight, put thy hand, I pray thee, under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly with me. Bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt,
but when I sleep with my fathers, thou shall carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in their burying place. And he said, I will do as thou have said.
And he said, Swear to me, and he swore to him. And Israel bowed himself upon the head of the bed.

And it came to pass after these things, that it was reported to Joseph, Behold, thy father is sick. And he took with him his two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
And it was reported to Jacob, saying, Behold, thy son Joseph comes to thee. And Israel strengthened himself, and sat upon the bed.
And Jacob said to Joseph, God Almighty appeared to me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,
and said to me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will make of thee a company of peoples, and will give this land to thy seed after thee for an everlasting possession.
And now thy two sons, who were born to thee in the land of Egypt before I came to thee into Egypt, are mine, Ephraim and Manasseh, even as Reuben and Simeon, shall be mine.
And thy issue, which thou beget after them, shall be thine, they shall be called after the name of their brothers in their inheritance.
And as for me, when I came from Paddan, Rachel died by me in the land of Canaan on the way, when there was still some distance to come to Ephrath. And I buried her there on the way to Ephrath (the same is Bethlehem).
And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who are these?
And Joseph said to his father, They are my sons, whom God has given me here. And he said, Bring them, I pray thee, to me, and I will bless them.
Now the eyes of Israel were dim for age, so that he could not see. And he brought them near to him, and he kissed them, and embraced them.
And Israel said to Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face, and, lo, God has let me see thy seed also.
And Joseph brought them out from between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.
And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's right hand, and brought them near to him.
And Israel stretched out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who was the younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands deliberately, for Manasseh was the firstborn.
And he blessed Joseph, and said, The God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac walked, the God who has fed me all my life long to this day,
the agent who has redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads, and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers Abraham and Isaac, and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of the earth.
And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him. And he held up his father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head to Manasseh's head.
And Joseph said to his father, Not so, my father, for this is the firstborn, put thy right hand upon his head.
And his father refused, and said, I know, my son, I know. He also shall become a people, and he also shall be great. However, his younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a multitude of nations.
And he blessed them that day, saying, In thee will Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as Manasseh. And he set Ephraim before Manasseh.
And Israel said to Joseph, Behold, I die, but God will be with you, and bring you again to the land of your fathers.
Moreover I have given to thee one portion above thy brothers, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.

And Jacob called to his sons, and said, gather yourselves together, that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the latter days.
Assemble yourselves, and hear, ye sons of Jacob, and hearken to Israel your father.
Reuben, thou are my firstborn, my might, and the beginning of my strength, the pre-eminence of dignity, and the pre-eminence of power.
Boiling over as water, thou shall not have the pre-eminence, because thou went up to thy father's bed, then thou defiled it; he went up to my couch.
Simeon and Levi are brothers, weapons of violence are their swords.
O my soul, come not thou into their council, to their assembly, my glory, be not thou united, for in their anger they slew a man, and in their self-will they hocked an ox.
Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce, and their wrath, for it was cruel. I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel.
Judah, thy brothers shall praise thee. Thy hand shall be on the neck of thine enemies. Thy father's sons shall bow down before thee.
Judah is a lion's whelp. From the prey, my son, thou have gone up. He stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as a lioness, who shall rouse him up?
The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the ruler's staff from between his feet, until he comes to whom it belongs, and to him shall the obedience of the peoples be.
Binding his foal to the vine, and his donkey's colt to the choice vine, he has washed his garments in wine, and his vesture in the blood of grapes.
His eyes shall be red with wine, and his teeth white with milk.
Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea, and he shall be for a haven of ships. And his border shall be upon Sidon.
Issachar is a strong donkey, couching down between the sheepfolds.
And he saw a resting place that it was good, and the land that it was pleasant. And he bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant under task work.
Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
Dan shall be a serpent in the way, an adder in the path, that bites the horse's heels, so that his rider falls backward.
I have waited for thy salvation, O Jehovah.
Gad, a troop shall press upon him, but he shall press upon their heel.
Out of the Asher his bread shall be fat, and he shall yield royal dainties.
Naphtali is a hind let loose. He gives goodly words.
Joseph is a fruitful bough, a fruitful bough by a fountain, his branches run over the wall.
The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and persecute him,
but his bow abode in strength. And the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob (From there is the shepherd, the stone of Israel),
even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee, and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that couches beneath, blessings of the breasts, and of the womb.
The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my forefathers to the utmost bound of the everlasting hills. They shall be on the head of Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him who was separate from his brothers.
Benjamin is a wolf that ravens. In the morning he shall devour the prey, and at evening he shall divide the spoil.
All these are the twelve tribes of Israel, and this is it that their father spoke to them and blessed them; every man according to his blessing he blessed them.
And he ordered them, and said to them, I am to be gathered to my people. Bury me with my fathers in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite,
in the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the field from Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a burying place.
There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife, there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife, and there I buried Leah,
the field and the cave that is in it, which was purchased from the sons of Heth.
And when Jacob made an end of charging his sons, he gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the spirit, and was gathered to his people.

And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him, and kissed him.
And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians to embalm his father. And the physicians embalmed Israel.
And forty days were fulfilled for him, for so are fulfilled the days of embalming. And the Egyptians wept for him seventy days.
And when the days of weeping for him were past, Joseph spoke to the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found favor in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die. In my grave which I have dug for me in the land of Canaan, there shall thou bury me. Now therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will come again.
And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father, according as he made thee swear.
And Joseph went up to bury his father, and with him went up all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the elders of the land of Egypt,
and all the house of Joseph, and his brothers, and his father's house. Only their little ones, and their flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen.
And there went up with him both chariots and horsemen. And it was a very great company.
And they came to the threshing floor of Atad, which is beyond the Jordan. And there they lamented with a very great and sore lamentation. And he made a mourning for his father seven days.
And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This is a grievous mourning to the Egyptians. Therefore the name of it was called Abel-mizraim, which is beyond the Jordan.
And his sons did to him according as he commanded them.
For his sons carried him into the land of Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which Abraham bought with the field, for a possession of a burying place, of Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.
And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brothers, and all who went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his father.
And when Joseph's brothers saw that their father was dead, they said, It may be that Joseph will hate us, and will fully requite us all the evil which we did to him.
And they sent a message to Joseph, saying, Thy father commanded before he died, saying,
So shall ye say to Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now, the transgression of thy brothers, and their sin, because they did to thee evil. And now, we pray thee, forgive the transgression of the servants of the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spoke to him.
And his brothers also went and fell down before his face, and they said, Behold, we are thy servants.
And Joseph said to them, Fear not, for am I in the place of God?
And as for you, ye meant evil against me, but God meant it for good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive.
Now therefore fear ye not. I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he comforted them, and spoke kindly to them.
And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father's house. And Joseph lived a hundred and ten years.
And Joseph saw Ephraim's sons of the third generation. Also the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh were born upon Joseph's knees.
And Joseph said to his brothers, I die, but God will surely visit you, and bring you up out of this land to the land which he swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
And Joseph took an oath of the sons of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from here.
So Joseph died, being a hundred and ten years old, and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.

Exodus

Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,
Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin,
Dan and Naphtali, Gad and Asher.
And all the souls who came out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls. And Joseph was in Egypt already.
And Joseph died, and all his brothers, and all that generation.
And the sons of Israel were fruitful, and increased abundantly, and multiplied, and grew exceedingly mighty, and the land was filled with them.
Now there arose a new king over Egypt, who knew not Joseph.
And he said to his people, Behold, the people of the sons of Israel are more and mightier than we.
Come, let us deal craftily with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass, that, when war happens, they also join themselves to our enemies, and fight against us, and get them up out of the land.
Therefore they set taskmasters over them to afflict them with their burdens. And they built store-cities for Pharaoh, Pithom and Rameses.
But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and the more they spread out. And they were grieved because of the sons of Israel.
And the Egyptians made the sons of Israel to serve with rigor.
And they made their lives bitter with hard service, in mortar and in brick, and in all manner of service in the field, all their service, with which they made them serve with rigor.
And the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives, of whom the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other Puah.
And he said, When ye do the office of a midwife to the Hebrew women, and see them upon the birth-stool, if it be a son, then ye shall kill him, but if it be a daughter, then she shall live.
But the midwives feared God, and did not do as the king of Egypt commanded them, but saved the male children alive.
And the king of Egypt called for the midwives, and said to them, Why have ye done this thing, and have saved the male children alive?
And the midwives said to Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian women, for they are lively, and are delivered before the midwife comes to them.
And God dealt well with the midwives. And the people multiplied, and grew very mighty.
And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them households.
And Pharaoh ordered all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, and every daughter ye shall save alive.

And there went a man of the house of Levi, and took to wife a daughter of Levi.
And the woman conceived, and bore a son. And when she saw him that he was a goodly child, she hid him three months.
And when she could no longer hide him, she took for him an ark of bulrushes, and daubed it with slime and with pitch. And she put the child in it, and laid it in the reeds by the river's edge.
And his sister stood afar off, to know what would be done to him.
And the daughter of Pharaoh came down to bathe at the river, and her maidens walked along by the riverside. And she saw the ark among the reeds, and sent her handmaid to fetch it.
And she opened it, and saw the child, and, behold, the babe wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is one of the Hebrews' children.
Then his sister said to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call a nurse for thee from the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?
And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the maiden went and called the child's mother.
And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Take this child away, and nurse it for me, and I will give thee thy wages. And the woman took the child, and nursed it.
And the child grew, and she brought him to Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name Moses, and said, Because I drew him out of the water.
And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown up, that he went out to his brothers, and looked on their burdens. And he saw an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his brothers.
And he looked this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he smote the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
And he went out the second day, and, behold, two men of the Hebrews were striving together. And he said to him who did the wrong, Why do thou smite thy neighbor?
And he said, Who made thee a prince and a judge over us? Do thou think to kill me, as thou killed the Egyptian? And Moses feared, and said, Surely the thing is known.
Now when Pharaoh heard this thing, he sought to kill Moses. But Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian, and he sat down by a well.
Now the priest of Midian had seven daughters. And they came and drew water, and filled the troughs to water their father's flock.
And the shepherds came and drove them away, but Moses stood up and helped them, and watered their flock.
And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, How is it that ye have come so soon today?
And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and moreover he drew water for us, and watered the flock.
And he said to his daughters, And where is he? Why is it that ye have left the man? Call him, that he may eat bread.
And Moses was content to dwell with the man, and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.
And she bore a son, and he called his name Gershom, for he said, I have been a sojourner in a foreign land.
And it came to pass in the course of those many days, that the king of Egypt died. And the sons of Israel sighed because of the bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up to God because of the bondage.
And God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob.
And God saw the sons of Israel, and God took knowledge of them.

Now Moses was keeping the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian. And he led the flock to the back of the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God, to Horeb.
And the agent of Jehovah appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a bush. And he looked, and, behold, the bush burned with fire, and the bush was not consumed.
And Moses said, I will turn aside now, and see this great sight, why the bush is not burnt.
And when Jehovah saw that he turned aside to see, God called to him out of the midst of the bush, and said, Moses, Moses. And he said, Here I am.
And he said, Do not draw near here. Put off thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place on which thou stand is holy ground.
Moreover he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look upon God.
And Jehovah said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and have heard their cry because of their taskmasters, for I know their sorrows.
And I have come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land to a good and large land, to a land flowing with milk and honey, to the place of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
And now, behold, the cry of the sons of Israel has come to me. Moreover I have seen the oppression with which the Egyptians oppress them.
Come now therefore, and I will send thee to Pharaoh, that thou may bring forth my people the sons of Israel out of Egypt.
And Moses said to God, Who am I, that I should go to Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the sons of Israel out of Egypt?
When thou have brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.
And Moses said to God, Behold, when I come to the sons of Israel, and shall say to them, The God of your fathers has sent me to you, and they shall say to me, What is his name? What shall I say to them?
And God said to Moses, I AM WHO I AM. And he said, Thus shall thou say to the sons of Israel, I AM has sent me to you.
And God said moreover to Moses, Thus shall thou say to the sons of Israel, Jehovah, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has sent me to you. This is my name forever, and this is my memorial to all generations.
Go, and gather the elders of Israel together, and say to them, Jehovah, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, has appeared to me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to you in Egypt.
And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt to the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, to a land flowing with milk and honey.
And they shall hearken to thy voice. And thou shall come, thou and the elders of Israel, to the king of Egypt, and ye shall say to him, Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, has met with us. And now let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.
And I know that the king of Egypt will not give you leave to go, no, not by a mighty hand.
And I will put forth my hand, and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst of it, and after that he will let you go.
And I will give this people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. And it shall come to pass, that, when ye go, ye shall not go empty.
But every woman shall ask of her neighbor, and of her who sojourns in her house, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment. And ye shall put them upon your sons, and upon your daughters, and ye shall despoil the Egyptians.

And Moses answered and said, But behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken to my voice, for they will say, Jehovah has not appeared to thee.
And Jehovah said to him, What is that in thy hand? And he said, A rod.
And he said, Cast in on the ground. And he cast it on the ground. And it became a serpent, and Moses fled from before it.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Put forth thy hand, and take it by the tail (and he put forth his hand, and laid hold of it, and it became a rod in his hand),
that they may believe that Jehovah, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, has appeared to thee.
And Jehovah said furthermore to him, Put now thy hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom. And when he took it out, behold, his hand was leprous, as snow.
And he said, Put thy hand into thy bosom again. (And he put his hand into his bosom again, and when he took it out of his bosom, behold, it was turned again as his other flesh.)
And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, nor hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the latter sign.
And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe even these two signs, nor hearken to thy voice, that thou shall take of the water of the river, and pour it upon the dry land. And the water which thou take out of the river shall become blood upon the dry land.
And Moses said to Jehovah, Oh, Lord, I am not eloquent, neither heretofore, nor since thou have spoken to thy servant, for I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue.
And Jehovah said to him, Who has made man's mouth? Or who makes a man dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? Is it not I, Jehovah?
Now therefore go, and I will be with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall speak.
And he said, Oh, Lord, send, I pray thee, by the hand of him whom thou will send.
And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Moses, and he said, Is there not Aaron thy brother the Levite? I know that he can speak well. And also, behold, he comes forth to meet thee, and when he sees thee, he will be glad in his heart.
And thou shall speak to him, and put the words in his mouth. And I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do,
and he shall be thy spokesman to the people. And it shall come to pass, that he shall be to thee a mouth, and thou shall be to him as God.
And thou shall take this rod in thy hand, with which thou shall do the signs.
And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father-in-law, and said to him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return to my brothers who are in Egypt, and see whether they be yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.
And Jehovah said to Moses in Midian, Go, return into Egypt, for all the men are dead who sought thy life.
And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them upon a donkey, and he returned to the land of Egypt. And Moses took the rod of God in his hand.
And Jehovah said to Moses, When thou go back into Egypt, see that thou do before Pharaoh all the wonders which I have put in thy hand, but I will harden his heart and he will not let the people go.
And thou shall say to Pharaoh, Thus says Jehovah, Israel is my son, my firstborn,
and I have said to thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me, and thou have refused to let him go. Behold, I will slay thy son, thy firstborn.
And it came to pass on the way at the lodging-place, that Jehovah met him, and sought to kill him.
Then Zipporah took a flint, and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet. And she said, Surely a bridegroom of blood thou are to me.
So he let him alone. Then she said, A bridegroom of blood thou are, because of the circumcision.
And Jehovah said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him on the mountain of God, and kissed him.
And Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah with which he had sent him, and all the signs with which he had ordered him.
And Moses and Aaron went and gathered together all the elders of the sons of Israel.
And Aaron spoke all the words which Jehovah had spoken to Moses, and did the signs in the sight of the people.
And the people believed. And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the sons of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshiped.

And afterward Moses and Aaron came, and said to Pharaoh, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Let my people go, that they may hold a feast to me in the wilderness.
And Pharaoh said, Who is Jehovah, that I should hearken to his voice to let Israel go? I do not know Jehovah, and moreover I will not let Israel go.
And they said, The God of the Hebrews has met with us. Let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to Jehovah our God, lest he fall upon us with pestilence, or with the sword.
And the king of Egypt said to them, Therefore do ye, Moses and Aaron, loose the people from their works? Get you to your burdens.
And Pharaoh said, Behold, the people of the land are now many, and ye make them rest from their burdens.
And the same day Pharaoh commanded the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying,
Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick as formerly. Let them go and gather straw for themselves.
And the number of the bricks, which they made formerly, ye shall lay upon them. Ye shall not diminish any of it. For they are idle, therefore they cry, saying, Let us go and sacrifice to our God.
Let heavier work be laid upon the men, that they may labor in it, and let them not regard lying words.
And the taskmasters of the people went out, and their officers, and they spoke to the people, saying, Thus says Pharaoh, I will not give you straw.
Go yourselves, get you straw where ye can find it, for none of your work shall be diminished.
So the people were scattered abroad throughout all the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.
And the taskmasters were urgent saying, Fulfill your works, your daily tasks, as when there was straw.
And the officers of the sons of Israel, whom Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, and demanded, Why have ye not fulfilled your task both yesterday and today, in making brick as formerly?
Then the officers of the sons of Israel came and cried to Pharaoh, saying, Why do thou deal thus with thy servants?
There is no straw given to thy servants, and they say to us, Make brick. And, behold, thy servants are beaten, but the fault it in thine own people.
But he said, Ye are idle, ye are idle. Therefore ye say, Let us go and sacrifice to Jehovah.
Go therefore now, and work, for there shall no straw be given you, yet ye shall deliver the number of bricks.
And the officers of the sons of Israel saw that they were in affliction, when it was said, Ye shall not diminish anything from your bricks, your daily tasks.
And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood in the way, as they came forth from Pharaoh,
and they said to them, Jehovah look upon you, and judge, because ye have made our fragrance to be abhorred in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his servants, to put a sword in their hand to slay us.
And Moses returned to Jehovah, and said, Lord, why have thou dealt ill with this people? Why is it that thou have sent me?
For since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he has dealt ill with this people, neither have thou delivered thy people at all.

And Jehovah said to Moses, Now thou shall see what I will do to Pharaoh. For by a strong hand he shall let them go, and by a strong hand he shall drive them out of his land.
And God spoke to Moses, and said to him, I am Jehovah.
And I appeared to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, as God Almighty, but I was not known by them by my name Jehovah.
And I also established my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their sojourning, in which they sojourned.
And moreover I have heard the groaning of the sons of Israel, whom the Egyptians keep in bondage, and I have remembered my covenant.
Therefore say to the sons of Israel, I am Jehovah. And I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will rid you out of their bondage, and I will redeem you with an outstretched arm, and with great judgments.
And I will take you to me for a people, and I will be to you a God, and ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God, who brings you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
And I will bring you in to the land which I swore to give to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, and I will give it to you for a heritage. I am Jehovah.
And Moses spoke so to the sons of Israel, but they did not hearken to Moses for anguish of spirit, and for cruel bondage.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Go in, speak to Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the sons of Israel go out of his land.
And Moses spoke before Jehovah, saying, Behold, the sons of Israel have not hearkened to me, how then shall Pharaoh hear me, who am of uncircumcised lips?
And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, and gave them an order to the sons of Israel, and to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi, these are the families of Reuben.
Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanite woman, these are the families of Simeon.
Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari. And the years of the life of Levi were a hundred thirty-seven years.
Libni and Shimei, according to their families.
Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel. And the years of the life of Kohath were a hundred thirty-three years.
Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their generations.
And Amram took him Jochebed his father's sister to wife, and she bore him Aaron and Moses. And the years of the life of Amram were a hundred and thirty-seven years.
Korah, and Nepheg, and Zichri.
Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Sithri.
And Aaron took him Elisheba, the daughter of Amminadab, the sister of Nahshon, to wife, and she bore him Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph. These are the families of the Korahites.
And Eleazar Aaron's son took to him one of the daughters of Putiel to wife, and she bore to him Phinehas. These are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
These are that Aaron and Moses, to whom Jehovah said, Bring out the sons of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their armies.
These are those who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the sons of Israel from Egypt. These are that Moses and Aaron.
And it came to pass on the day when Jehovah spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt,
that Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, I am Jehovah. Speak thou to Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I speak to thee.
And Moses said before Jehovah, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how shall Pharaoh hearken to me?

And Jehovah said to Moses, See, I have made thee as God to Pharaoh, and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
Thou shall speak all that I command thee, and Aaron thy brother shall speak to Pharaoh, that he let the sons of Israel go out of his land.
And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.
But Pharaoh will not hearken to you. And I will lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth my armies, my people the sons of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.
And the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah, when I stretch forth my hand upon Egypt, and bring out the sons of Israel from among them.
And Moses and Aaron did so, as Jehovah commanded them, so they did.
And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron eighty-three years old, when they spoke to Pharaoh.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
When Pharaoh shall speak to you, saying, Show a wonder for you, then thou shall say to Aaron, Take thy rod, and cast it down before Pharaoh, that it become a serpent.
And Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh. And they did so, as Jehovah had commanded, and Aaron cast down his rod before Pharaoh and before his servants, and it became a serpent.
Then Pharaoh also called for the wise men and the sorcerers. And they also, the magicians of Egypt, did in like manner with their enchantments.
For they cast down every man his rod, and they became serpents, but Aaron's rod swallowed up their rods.
And Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Pharaoh's heart is stubborn; he refuses to let the people go.
Get thee to Pharaoh in the morning, lo, he goes out to the water, and thou shall stand by the river's edge to meet him, and the rod which was turned to a serpent thou shall take in thy hand.
And thou shall say to him, Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, has sent me to thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness. And, behold, until now thou have not hearkened.
Thus says Jehovah, In this thou shall know that I am Jehovah. Behold, I will smite with the rod that is in my hand upon the waters which are in the river, and they shall be turned to blood.
And the fish that are in the river shall die, and the river shall become foul, and the Egyptians shall loathe to drink water from the river.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Say to Aaron, Take thy rod, and stretch out thy hand over the waters of Egypt, over their rivers, over their streams, and over their pools, and over all their ponds of water, that they may become blood, and there shall be blood throughout all the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone.
And Moses and Aaron did so, as Jehovah commanded. And he lifted up the rod, and smote the waters that were in the river, in the sight of Pharaoh, and in the sight of his servants, and all the waters that were in the river were turned to blood.
And the fish that were in the river died, and the river became foul, and the Egyptians could not drink water from the river. And the blood was throughout all the land of Egypt.
And the magicians of Egypt did in like manner with their enchantments. And Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken.
And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, neither did he lay even this to heart.
And all the Egyptians dug round about the river for water to drink, for they could not drink of the water of the river.
And seven days were fulfilled, after Jehovah had smitten the river.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh, and say to him, Thus says Jehovah, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
And if thou refuse to let them go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs.
And the river shall swarm with frogs, which shall go up and come into thy house, and into thy bedchamber, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy servants, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneading-troughs.
And the frogs shall come up both upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon all thy servants.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Say to Aaron, Stretch forth thy hand with thy rod over the rivers, over the streams, and over the pools, and cause frogs to come up upon the land of Egypt.
And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt, and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.
And the magicians did in like manner with their enchantments, and brought up frogs upon the land of Egypt.
Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron, and said, Entreat Jehovah, that he take away the frogs from me, and from my people, and I will let the people go, that they may sacrifice to Jehovah.
When shall I entreat for thee, and for thy servants, and for thy people, that the frogs be destroyed from thee and thy houses, and remain in the river only?
And he said, Tomorrow. And he said, Be it according to thy word, that thou may know that there is none like Jehovah our God.
And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy servants, and from thy people, they shall remain in the river only.
And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh. And Moses cried to Jehovah concerning the frogs which he had brought upon Pharaoh.
And Jehovah did according to the word of Moses. And the frogs died out of the houses, out of the courts, and out of the fields.
And they gathered them together in heaps, and the land stank.
But when Pharaoh saw that there was relief, he hardened his heart, and did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Say to Aaron, Stretch out thy rod, and smite the dust of the earth, that it may become lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
And they did so. And Aaron stretched out his hand with his rod, and smote the dust of the earth. And there were lice upon man, and upon beast; all the dust of the earth became lice throughout all the land of Egypt.
And the magicians did so with their enchantments to bring forth lice, but they could not. And there were lice upon man, and upon beast.
Then the magicians said to Pharaoh, This is the finger of God. And Pharaoh's heart was hardened, and he did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh. Lo, he comes forth to the water. And say to him, Thus says Jehovah, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
Else, if thou will not let my people go, behold, I will send swarms of flies upon thee, and upon they servants, and upon thy people, and into thy houses. And the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of swarms of flies, and also the ground on which they are.
And in that day I will set apart the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no swarms of flies shall be there, to the end thou may know that I am Jehovah in the midst of the earth.
And I will put a division between my people and thy people. This sign shall be by tomorrow.
And Jehovah did so, and there came grievous swarms of flies into the house of Pharaoh, and into his servants' houses. And in all the land of Egypt the land was corrupted because of the swarms of flies.
And Pharaoh called for Moses and for Aaron, and said, Go ye, sacrifice to your God in the land.
And Moses said, It is not right to do so, for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to Jehovah our God. Lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and will they not stone us?
We will go three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to Jehovah our God, as he shall command us.
And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that ye may sacrifice to Jehovah your God in the wilderness, only ye shall not go very far away. Entreat for me.
And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and I will entreat Jehovah that the swarms of flies may depart from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people, tomorrow. Only let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to Jehovah.
And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and entreated Jehovah.
And Jehovah did according to the word of Moses, and he removed the swarms of flies from Pharaoh, from his servants, and from his people; there remained not one.
And Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, and he did not let the people go.

Then Jehovah said to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
For if thou refuse to let them go, and will still hold them,
behold, the hand of Jehovah is upon thy cattle which are in the field, upon the horses, upon the donkeys, upon the camels, upon the herds, and upon the flocks-a very grievous pestilence.
And Jehovah shall make a distinction between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt, and there shall nothing die of all that belongs to the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah appointed a set time, saying, Tomorrow Jehovah shall do this thing in the land.
And Jehovah did that thing on the morrow, and all the cattle of Egypt died, but of the cattle of the sons of Israel not one died.
And Pharaoh sent, and, behold, there was not so much as one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. But the heart of Pharaoh was stubborn, and he did not let the people go.
And Jehovah said to Moses and to Aaron, Take to you handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward heaven in the sight of Pharaoh.
And it shall become small dust over all the land of Egypt, and shall be a boil breaking forth with sores upon man and upon beast, throughout all the land of Egypt.
And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh, and Moses sprinkled it up toward heaven, and it became a boil breaking forth with sores upon man and upon beast.
And the magicians could not stand before Moses because of the boils, for the boils were upon the magicians, and upon all the Egyptians.
And Jehovah hardened the heart of Pharaoh, and he did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had spoken to Moses.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh, and say to him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
For this time I will send all my plagues upon thy heart, and upon thy servants, and upon thy people, that thou may know that there is none like me in all the earth.
For now I have put forth my hand, and smitten thee and thy people with pestilence, and thou have been cut off from the earth.
But indeed for this cause I have raised thee up, to display in thee my power, and that my name may be proclaimed in all the earth.
As yet thou exalt thyself against my people, that thou will not let them go?
Behold, tomorrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as has not been in Egypt since the day it was founded even until now.
Now therefore send, hasten in thy cattle and all that thou have in the field, for every man and beast that shall be found in the field, and shall not be brought home, the hail shall come down upon them, and they shall die.
He who feared the word of Jehovah among the servants of Pharaoh made his servants and his cattle flee into the houses.
And he who did not regard the word of Jehovah left his servants and his cattle in the field.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch forth thy hand toward heaven, that there may be hail in all the land of Egypt, upon man, and upon beast, and upon every herb of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.
And Moses stretched forth his rod toward heaven, and Jehovah sent thunder and hail, and fire ran down to the earth, and Jehovah rained hail upon the land of Egypt.
So there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as had not been in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
And throughout all the land of Egypt the hail smote all that was in the field, both man and beast, and the hail smote every herb of the field, and broke every tree of the field.
Only in the land of Goshen, where the sons of Israel were, was there no hail.
And Pharaoh sent, and called for Moses and Aaron, and said to them, I have sinned this time. Jehovah is righteous, and I and my people are wicked.
Entreat Jehovah, for there has been enough of these mighty thunderings and hail, and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer.
And Moses said to him, As soon as I am gone out of the city, I will spread abroad my hands to Jehovah. The thunders shall cease, neither shall there be any more hail, that thou may know that the earth is Jehovah's.
But as for thee and thy servants, I know that ye will not yet fear Jehovah God.
And the flax and the barley were smitten, for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was in bloom.
But the wheat and the rye were not smitten, for they were not grown up.
And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread abroad his hands to Jehovah, and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not poured upon the earth.
And when Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders were ceased, he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he and his servants.
And the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the sons of Israel go, as Jehovah had spoken by Moses.

And Jehovah said to Moses, Go in to Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his servants, that I may show these my signs in the midst of them,
and that thou may tell in the ears of thy son, and of thy son's son, what things I have wrought upon Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them, that ye may know that I am Jehovah.
And Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and said to him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, How long will thou refuse to humble thyself before me? Let my people go, that they may serve me.
Else, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, tomorrow I will bring locusts into thy border.
And they shall cover the face of the earth, so that no man is able to see the ground. And they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which remains to you from the hail, and shall eat every tree which grows for you out of the field.
And thy houses shall be filled, and the houses of all thy servants, and the houses of all the Egyptians, as neither thy fathers nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth to this day. And he turned, and went out from Pharaoh.
And Pharaoh's servants said to him, How long shall this man be a snare to us? Let the men go, that they may serve Jehovah their God. Do thou not yet know that Egypt is destroyed?
And Moses and Aaron were brought again to Pharaoh. And he said to them, Go, serve Jehovah your God, but who are those who shall go?
And Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters, with our flocks and with our herds will we go, for we must hold a feast to Jehovah.
And he said to them, So be Jehovah with you, as I will let you go, and your little ones. Look, evil is before you.
Not so. Go ye now who are men, and serve Jehovah, for that is what ye desire. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up upon the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land, even all that the hail has left.
And Moses stretched forth his rod over the land of Egypt, and Jehovah brought an east wind upon the land all that day, and all the night, and when it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.
And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the borders of Egypt, very grievous were they, before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them shall be such.
For they covered the face of the whole ground, so that the land was darkened, and they ate every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees which the hail had left. And there remained not any green thing, either tree nor herb of the field, through all the land of Egypt.
Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste, and he said, I have sinned against Jehovah your God, and against you.
Now therefore forgive, I pray thee, my sin only this once, and entreat Jehovah your God, that he may only take away from me this death.
And he went out from Pharaoh, and entreated Jehovah.
And Jehovah turned an exceedingly strong west wind, which took up the locusts, and drove them into the Red Sea. There remained not one locust in all the border of Egypt.
But Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he did not let the sons of Israel go.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand toward heaven, that there may be darkness over the land of Egypt, even darkness which may be felt.
And Moses stretched forth his hand toward heaven, and there was a thick darkness in all the land of Egypt three days,
they did not see each other, neither did anyone rise from his place for three days, but all the sons of Israel had light in their dwellings.
And Pharaoh called to Moses, and said, Go ye, serve Jehovah, only let your flocks and your herds stay. Let your little ones also go with you.
And Moses said, Thou must also give into our hand sacrifices and burnt offerings, that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.
Our cattle shall also go with us, there shall not a hoof be left behind, for we must take of it to serve Jehovah our God, and we do not know with what we must serve Jehovah, until we come there.
But Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he would not let them go.
And Pharaoh said to him, Get thee from me. Take heed to thyself, see my face no more, for in the day thou see my face thou shall die.
And Moses said, Thou have spoken well. I will see thy face again no more.

And Jehovah said to Moses, Yet one plague more I will bring upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt, afterwards he will let you go from here. When he shall let you go, he shall surely thrust you out from here altogether.
Speak now in the ears of the people, and let them ask every man of his neighbor, and every woman of her neighbor, jewels of silver, and jewels of gold.
And Jehovah gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt, in the sight of Pharaoh's servants, and in the sight of the people.
And Moses said, Thus says Jehovah, About midnight I will go out into the midst of Egypt,
and all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sits upon his throne, even to the firstborn of the maid-servant that is behind the mill, and all the firstborn of cattle.
And there shall be a great cry throughout all the land of Egypt, such as there has not been, nor shall be any more.
But against any of the sons of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast, that ye may know how that Jehovah makes a distinction between the Egyptians and Israel.
And all these thy servants shall come down to me, and bow themselves down to me, saying, Get thee out, and all the people who follow thee. And after that I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in hot anger.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Pharaoh will not hearken to you, that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.
And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh. And Jehovah hardened Pharaoh's heart, and he did not let the sons of Israel go out of his land.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,
This month shall be to you the beginning of months; it shall be the first month of the year to you.
Speak ye to all the congregation of Israel, saying, In the tenth day of this month they shall take to them every man a lamb, according to their fathers' houses, a lamb for a household.
And if the household be too little for a lamb, then he and his neighbor next to his house shall take one according to the number of the souls, according to every man's eating ye shall make your count for the lamb.
Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male a year old. Ye shall take it from the sheep, or from the goats.
And ye shall keep it until the fourteenth day of the same month, and the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill it at evening.
And they shall take of the blood, and put it on the two side-posts and on the lintel upon the houses in which they shall eat it.
And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roasted with fire, and unleavened bread, with bitter herbs they shall eat it.
Do not eat of it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roasted with fire, its head with its legs and with the inwards of it.
And ye shall let nothing of it remain until the morning, but that which remains of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.
with your loins girded, your shoes on your feet, and your staff in your hand. And ye shall eat it in haste. It is Jehovah's Passover.
For I will go through the land of Egypt in that night, and will smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast, and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgments. I am Jehovah.
And the blood shall be to you for a sign upon the houses where ye are. And when I see the blood, I will pass over you, and there shall no plague be upon you to destroy you, when I smite the land of Egypt.
And this day shall be to you for a memorial, and ye shall keep it a feast to Jehovah; throughout your generations ye shall keep it a feast by an ordinance forever.
Seven days ye shall eat unleavened bread, even the first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses, for whoever eats leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day, that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
And in the first day there shall be to you a holy convocation, and in the seventh day a holy convocation, no manner of work shall be done in them, except that which every man must eat, that only may be done by you.
And ye shall observe the feast of unleavened bread, for in this selfsame day I have brought your armies out of the land of Egypt. Therefore ye shall observe this day throughout your generations by an ordinance forever.
In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at evening, ye shall eat unleavened bread, until the twenty-first day of the month at evening.
Seven days there shall be no leaven found in your houses, for whoever eats that which is leavened, that soul shall be cut off from the congregation of Israel, whether he be a sojourner, or one who is born in the land.
Ye shall eat nothing leavened, in all your habitations ye shall eat unleavened bread.
Then Moses called for all the elders of Israel, and said to them, Draw out, and take to you lambs according to your families, and kill the Passover.
And ye shall take a bunch of hyssop, and dip it in the blood that is in the basin, and strike the lintel and the two side-posts with the blood that is in the basin, and none of you shall go out of the door of his house until the morning.
For Jehovah will pass through to smite the Egyptians, and when he sees the blood upon the lintel, and on the two side-posts, Jehovah will pass over the door, and will not allow the destroyer to come in to your houses to smite you.
And ye shall observe this thing for an ordinance to thee and to thy sons forever.
And it shall come to pass, when ye have come to the land which Jehovah will give you, according as he has promised, that ye shall keep this service.
And it shall come to pass, when your sons shall say to you, What do ye mean by this service?
that ye shall say, It is the sacrifice of Jehovah's Passover, who passed over the houses of the sons of Israel in Egypt, when he smote the Egyptians, and delivered our houses. And the people bowed the head and worshiped.
And the sons of Israel went and did so, as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
And it came to pass at midnight, that Jehovah smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the firstborn of the captive who was in the dungeon, and all the firstborn of cattle.
And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his servants, and all the Egyptians, and there was a great cry in Egypt, for there was not a house where there was not one dead.
And he called for Moses and Aaron by night, and said, Rise up, get you forth from among my people, both ye and the sons of Israel, and go, serve Jehovah, as ye have said.
Take both your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and be gone, and bless me also.
And the Egyptians were urgent upon the people, to send them out of the land in haste, for they said, We are all dead men.
And the people took their dough before it was leavened, their kneading-troughs being bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.
And the sons of Israel did according to the word of Moses, and they asked of the Egyptians jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and raiment.
And Jehovah gave the people favor in the sight of the Egyptians, so that they let them have what they asked. And they despoiled the Egyptians.
And the sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot who were men, besides children.
And a mixed multitude also went up with them, and flocks, and herds, even very much cattle.
And they baked unleavened cakes of the dough which they brought forth out of Egypt, for it was not leavened, because they were thrust out of Egypt, and could not tarry, neither had they prepared for themselves any provisions.
Now the time that the sons of Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt and the land of Canaan was four hundred and thirty years.
And it came to pass at the end of four hundred and thirty years, even the selfsame day it came to pass, that all the armies of Jehovah went out from the land of Egypt.
It is a night to be much observed to Jehovah for bringing them out from the land of Egypt. This is that night of Jehovah, to be much observed of all the sons of Israel throughout their generations.
And Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the Passover. There shall no foreigner eat of it,
but every man's servant who is bought for money, when thou have circumcised him, then he shall eat of it.
A sojourner and a hired servant shall not eat of it.
In one house it shall be eaten. Thou shall not carry forth any of the flesh abroad out of the house, neither shall ye break a bone of it.
All the congregation of Israel shall keep it.
And when a stranger shall sojourn with thee, and will keep the Passover to Jehovah, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and keep it, and he shall be as one who is born in the land, but no uncircumcised man shall eat of it.
One law shall be to him who is home-born, and to the stranger who sojourns among you.
Thus did all the sons of Israel, as Jehovah commanded Moses and Aaron, so did they.
And it came to pass the selfsame day, that Jehovah brought the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt by their armies.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Sanctify to me all the firstborn, whatever opens the womb among the sons of Israel. Both of man and of beast, it is mine.
And Moses said to the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage, for by strength of hand Jehovah brought you out from this place. There shall no leavened bread be eaten.
This day ye go forth in the month Abib.
And it shall be, when Jehovah shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Amorite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, which he swore to thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shall keep this service in this month.
Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread, and in the seventh day shall be a feast to Jehovah.
Unleavened bread shall be eaten throughout the seven days, and there shall no leavened bread be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy borders.
And thou shall tell thy son in that day, saying, It is because of that which Jehovah did for me when I came forth out of Egypt.
And it shall be for a sign to thee upon thy hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the law of Jehovah may be in thy mouth, for with a strong hand has Jehovah brought thee out of Egypt.
Thou shall therefore keep this ordinance in its season from year to year.
And it shall be, when Jehovah shall bring thee into the land of the Canaanite, as he swore to thee and to thy fathers, and shall give it to thee,
that thou shall set apart to Jehovah all that opens the womb. And every firstling which thou have that comes of a beast, the males shall be Jehovah's.
And every firstling of a donkey thou shall redeem with a lamb, and if thou will not redeem it, then thou shall break its neck. And all the firstborn of man among thy sons thou shall redeem.
And it shall be, when thy son asks thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shall say to him, By strength of hand Jehovah brought us out from Egypt, from the house of bondage.
And it came to pass, when Pharaoh would hardly let us go, that Jehovah slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of man, and the firstborn of beast. Therefore I sacrifice to Jehovah all that opens the womb, being males, but all the firstborn of my sons I redeem.
And it shall be for a sign upon thy hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes, for by strength of hand Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt.
And it came to pass, when Pharaoh had let the people go, that God led them not by the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near. For God said, Lest perhaps the people regret when they see war, and they return to Egypt.
But God led the people about, by the way of the wilderness by the Red Sea. And the sons of Israel went up armed out of the land of Egypt.
And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him, for he had strictly sworn the sons of Israel, saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones away from here with you.
And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, in the edge of the wilderness.
And Jehovah went before them by day in a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way, and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light, that they might go by day and by night.
The pillar of cloud by day, and the pillar of fire by night departed not from before the people.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, that they turn back and encamp before Pihahiroth, between Migdol and the sea, before Baal-zephon. Ye shall encamp opposite it by the sea.
And Pharaoh will say of the sons of Israel, They are entangled in the land; the wilderness has shut them in.
And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, and he shall follow after them, and I will get for me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his army, and the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah. And they did so.
And it was told the king of Egypt that the people were fled. And the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants was changed towards the people, and they said, What is this we have done, that we have let Israel go from serving us?
And he made ready his chariot, and took his people with him.
And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over all of them.
And Jehovah hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the sons of Israel, for the sons of Israel went out with a high hand.
And the Egyptians pursued after them, all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before Baal-zephon.
And when Pharaoh drew near, the sons of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians were marching after them, and they were very afraid. And the sons of Israel cried out to Jehovah,
and they said to Moses, Because there were no graves in Egypt, have thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? Why have thou dealt thus with us, to bring us forth out of Egypt?
Is not this the word that we spoke to thee in Egypt, saying, Let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? For it were better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we should die in the wilderness.
And Moses said to the people, Fear ye not. Stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah, which he will work for you today, for the Egyptians whom ye have seen today, ye shall see them again no more forever.
Jehovah will fight for you, and ye shall keep silent.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Why do thou cry to me? Speak to the sons of Israel, that they go forward.
And lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thy hand over the sea, and divide it, and the sons of Israel shall go into the midst of the sea on dry ground.
And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall go in after them, and I will get for me honor upon Pharaoh, and upon all his army, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
And the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah, when I have gotten for me honor upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon his horsemen.
And the agent of God, who went before the camp of Israel, moved and went behind them, and the pillar of cloud moved from before them, and stood behind them.
And it came between the camp of Egypt and the camp of Israel. And the cloud and the darkness was there, yet it gave light by night. And the one did not come near the other all the night.
And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and Jehovah caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all the night, and made the sea dry land, and the waters were divided.
And the sons of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry ground, and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand, and on their left.
And the Egyptians pursued, and went in after them into the midst of the sea, all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen.
And it came to pass in the morning watch, that Jehovah looked forth upon the army of the Egyptians through the pillar of fire and of cloud, and troubled the army of the Egyptians.
And he took off their chariot wheels, and they drove them with difficulty, so that the Egyptians said, Let us flee from the face of Israel, for Jehovah fights for them against the Egyptians.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand over the sea, that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots, and upon their horsemen.
And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to its strength when the morning appeared, and the Egyptians fled against it, and Jehovah overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea.
And the waters returned, and covered the chariots, and the horsemen, even all the army of Pharaoh who went in after them into the sea, there remained not so much as one of them.
But the sons of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the sea, and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand, and on their left.
Thus Jehovah saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians, and Israel saw the Egyptians dead upon the sea-shore.
And Israel saw the great work which Jehovah did upon the Egyptians. And the people feared Jehovah, and they believed in Jehovah, and in his servant Moses.

Then Moses and the sons of Israel sang this song to Jehovah, and spoke, saying, I will sing to Jehovah, for he has triumphed gloriously. The horse and his rider he has thrown into the sea.
Jehovah is my strength and song, and he has become my salvation. This is my God, and I will praise him, my father's God, and I will exalt him.
Jehovah is a man of war. Jehovah is his name.
Pharaoh's chariots and his army he has cast into the sea, and his chosen captains are sunk in the Red Sea.
The deeps cover them. They went down into the depths like a stone.
Thy right hand, O Jehovah, is glorious in power. Thy right hand, O Jehovah, dashes the enemy in pieces.
And in the greatness of thine excellency thou overthrow those who rise up against thee. Thou send forth thy wrath, it consumes them as stubble.
And with the blast of thy nostrils the waters were piled up. The floods stood up as a heap. The deeps were congealed in the heart of the sea.
The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my desire shall be satisfied upon them. I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them.
Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them. They sank as lead in the mighty waters.
Who is like thee, O Jehovah, among the gods? Who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
Thou stretched out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.
Thou in thy loving kindness have led the people that thou have redeemed. Thou have guided them in thy strength to thy holy habitation.
The peoples have heard, they tremble. Pangs have taken hold on the inhabitants of Philistia.
Then the chiefs of Edom were dismayed, the mighty men of Moab. Trembling takes hold upon them. All the inhabitants of Canaan are melted away.
Terror and dread falls upon them. By the greatness of thine arm they are as still as a stone, till thy people pass over, O Jehovah, till the people pass over whom thou have purchased.
Thou will bring them in, and plant them on the mountain of thine inheritance, the place, O Jehovah, which thou have made for thee to dwell in, the sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established.
Jehovah shall reign forever and ever.
For the horses of Pharaoh went in with his chariots and with his horsemen into the sea, and Jehovah brought back the waters of the sea upon them, but the sons of Israel walked on dry land in the midst of the sea.
And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her hand, and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with dances.
And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to Jehovah, for he has triumphed gloriously. The horse and his rider he has thrown into the sea.
And Moses led Israel onward from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur. And they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.
And when they came to Marah, they could not drink of the waters of Marah, for they were bitter. Therefore the name of it was called Marah.
And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
And he cried to Jehovah. And Jehovah showed him a tree, and he cast it into the waters, and the waters were made sweet. There he made for them a statute and an ordinance, and there he proved them,
and he said, If thou will diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and will do that which is right in his eyes, and will give ear to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the diseases upon thee, which I have put upon the Egyptians, for I am Jehovah who heals thee.
And they came to Elim, where were twelve springs of water, and seventy palm trees, and they encamped there by the waters.

And they took their journey from Elim. And all the congregation of the sons of Israel came to the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departing out of the land of Egypt.
And the whole congregation of the sons of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness.
And the sons of Israel said to them, Would that we had died by the hand of Jehovah in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, when we ate bread to the full, for ye have brought us forth into this wilderness, to kill this whole assembly with hunger.
Then Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you, and the people shall go out and gather a day's portion every day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or not.
And it shall come to pass on the sixth day, that they shall prepare that which they bring in, and it shall be twice as much as they gather daily.
And Moses and Aaron said to all the sons of Israel, At evening, then ye shall know that Jehovah has brought you out from the land of Egypt,
and in the morning, then ye shall see the glory of Jehovah, for he hears your murmurings against Jehovah. And what are we, that ye murmur against us?
And Moses said, This shall be when Jehovah shall give you flesh to eat in the evening, and bread to the full in the morning, for that Jehovah hears your murmurings which ye murmur against him. And what are we? Your murmurings are not against us, but against Jehovah.
And Moses said to Aaron, Say to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, Come near before Jehovah, for he has heard your murmurings.
And it came to pass, as Aaron spoke to the whole congregation of the sons of Israel, that they looked toward the wilderness, and, behold, the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
I have heard the murmurings of the sons of Israel. Speak to them, saying, At evening ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God.
And it came to pass at evening, that the quails came up, and covered the camp. And in the morning the dew lay round about the camp,
and when the dew that lay was gone up, behold, upon the face of the wilderness a small round thing, small as the hoarfrost on the ground.
And when the sons of Israel saw it, they said one to another, What is it? For they knew not what it was. And Moses said to them, It is the bread which Jehovah has given you to eat.
This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded, Gather ye of it every man according to his eating, an omer a head. According to the number of your persons, ye shall take it, every man for those who are in his tent.
And the sons of Israel did so, and gathered, some more, some less.
And when they measured it with an omer, he who gathered much had nothing over, and he who gathered little had no lack; they gathered every man according to his eating.
And Moses said to them, Let no man leave of it till the morning.
Notwithstanding they did not hearken to Moses, but some of them left of it until the morning, and it bred worms, and became foul, and Moses was angry with them.
And they gathered it morning by morning, every man according to his eating. And when the sun grew hot, it melted.
And it came to pass, that on the sixth day they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for each one. And all the rulers of the congregation came and told Moses.
And he said to them, This is that which Jehovah has spoken, Tomorrow is a solemn rest, a holy sabbath to Jehovah. Bake that which ye will bake, and boil that which ye will boil, and all that remains over lay up for you to be kept until the morning.
And they laid it up till the morning, as Moses bade, and it did not become foul, neither was there any worm in it.
And Moses said, Eat that today, for today is a sabbath to Jehovah. Today ye shall not find it in the field.
Six days ye shall gather it, but on the seventh day is the sabbath, there shall be none in it.
And it came to pass on the seventh day, that some of the people went out to gather, and they found none.
And Jehovah said to Moses, How long do ye refuse to keep my commandments and my laws?
See, because Jehovah has given you the sabbath, therefore he gives you on the sixth day the bread of two days. Abide ye every man in his place. Let no man go out of his place on the seventh day.
So the people rested on the seventh day.
And the house of Israel called the name of it Manna. And it was like coriander seed, white, and the taste of it was like wafers with honey.
And Moses said, This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded. Let an omerful of it be kept throughout your generations, that they may see the bread with which I fed you in the wilderness, when I brought you forth from the land of Egypt.
And Moses said to Aaron, Take a pot, and put an omerful of manna in it, and lay it up before Jehovah, to be kept throughout your generations.
As Jehovah commanded Moses, so Aaron laid it up before the Testimony, to be kept.
And the sons of Israel ate the manna forty years, until they came to a land inhabited. They ate the manna until they came to the borders of the land of Canaan.
Now an omer is the tenth part of an ephah.

And all the congregation of the sons of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, by their journeys, according to the commandment of Jehovah, and encamped in Rephidim. And there was no water for the people to drink.
Therefore the people contended with Moses, and said, Give us water that we may drink. And Moses said to them, Why do ye contend with me? Why do ye challenge Jehovah?
And the people thirsted there for water. And the people murmured against Moses, and said, Why have thou brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our sons and our cattle with thirst?
And Moses cried to Jehovah, saying, What shall I do to this people? They are almost ready to stone me.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Pass on before the people, and take with thee from the elders of Israel, and thy rod, with which thou smote the river, take in thy hand, and go.
Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb, and thou shall smite the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so in the sight of the elders of Israel.
And he called the name of the place Massah and Meribah, because of the contending of the sons of Israel, and because they challenged Jehovah, saying, Is Jehovah among us, or not?
Then Amalek came, and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
And Moses said to Joshua, Choose us out men, and go out, fight with Amalek. Tomorrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the rod of God in my hand.
So Joshua did as Moses had said to him, and fought with Amalek. And Moses, Aaron, and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
And it came to pass, when Moses held up his hand, that Israel prevailed, and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.
But Moses' hands were heavy. And they took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat on it. and Aaron and Hur held up his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side. And his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
And Joshua weakened Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
that I will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven.
And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovah-nissi.
And he said, Jehovah has sworn, Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation to generation.

Now Jethro, the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, heard of all that God had done for Moses, and for Israel his people, how that Jehovah had brought Israel out of Egypt.
And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her away,
and her two sons, of whom the name of the one was Gershom, for he said, I have been a sojourner in a foreign land.
And the name of the other was Eliezer, for he said, The God of my father was my help, and delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.
And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came with his sons and his wife to Moses into the wilderness where he was encamped, at the mount of God.
And he said to Moses, I, thy father-in-law Jethro, have come to thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her.
And Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and did obeisance, and kissed him. And they asked each other of their welfare, and they came into the tent.
And Moses told his father-in-law all that Jehovah had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake, all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and how Jehovah delivered them.
And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which Jehovah had done to Israel, in that he had delivered them out of the hand of the Egyptians.
And Jethro said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh, who has delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.
Now I know that Jehovah is greater than all gods, yea, in the thing wherein they dealt proudly against them.
And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took a burnt offering and sacrifices for God. And Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father-in-law before God.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people, and the people stood about Moses from the morning to the evening.
And when Moses' father-in-law saw all that he did to the people, he said, What is this thing that thou do to the people? Why do thou sit by thyself, and all the people stand about thee from morning to evening?
And Moses said to his father-in-law, Because the people come to me to inquire of God.
When they have a matter, they come to me, and I judge between a man and his neighbor. And I make them know the statutes of God, and his laws.
And Moses' father-in-law said to him, The thing that thou do is not good.
Thou will surely wear away, both thou, and this people that is with thee, for the thing is too heavy for thee. Thou are not able to perform it thyself alone.
Hearken now to my voice. I will give thee counsel, and God be with thee. Be thou for the people toward God, and bring thou the cases to God.
And thou shall teach them the statutes and the laws, and shall show them the way in which they must walk, and the work that they must do.
Moreover thou shall provide out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating unjust gain, and place such over them, to be rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens,
and let them judge the people at all seasons. And it shall be, that every great matter they shall bring to thee, but every small matter they shall judge themselves. So shall it be easier for thyself, and they shall bear the burden with thee.
If thou shall do this thing, and God command thee so, then thou shall be able to endure, and all this people also shall go to their place in peace.
So Moses hearkened to the voice of his father-in-law, and did all that he had said.
And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, rulers of thousands, rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties, and rulers of tens,
and they judged the people at all seasons. The hard cases they brought to Moses, but every small matter they judged themselves.
And Moses let his father-in-law depart, and he went his way into his own land.

In the third month after the sons of Israel were gone forth out of the land of Egypt, the same day they came into the wilderness of Sinai.
And when they were departed from Rephidim, and came to the wilderness of Sinai, they encamped in the wilderness, and there Israel encamped before the mount.
Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians, and how I bore you on eagles' wings, and brought you to myself.
Now therefore, if ye will obey my voice indeed, and keep my covenant, then ye shall be my own possession from among all peoples, for all the earth is mine,
and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation. These are the words which thou shall speak to the sons of Israel.
And Moses came and called for the elders of the people, and set before them all these words which Jehovah commanded him.
And all the people answered together, and said, All that Jehovah has spoken we will do. And Moses reported the words of the people to Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Lo, I come to thee in a thick cloud, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and may also believe thee forever. And Moses told the words of the people to Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Go to the people, and sanctify them today and tomorrow, and let them wash their garments,
and be ready for the third day, for the third day Jehovah will come down in the sight of all the people upon mount Sinai.
And thou shall set bounds to the people round about, saying, Take heed to yourselves, that ye not go up onto the mount, or touch the border of it. Whoever touches the mount shall be surely put to death;
no hand shall touch him, but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through, whether it be beast or man, he shall not live. When the trumpet sounds long, they shall come up to the mount.
And Moses went down from the mount to the people, and sanctified the people, and they washed their garments.
And he said to the people, Be ready for the third day. Come not near a woman.
And it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount, and the voice of an exceedingly loud trumpet. And all the people who were in the camp trembled.
And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet God, and they stood at the lower part of the mount.
And mount Sinai, the whole of it, smoked, because Jehovah descended upon it in fire, and the smoke of it ascended as the smoke of a furnace. And the whole mount quaked greatly.
And when the voice of the trumpet grew louder and louder, Moses spoke, and God answered him by a voice.
And Jehovah came down upon mount Sinai, to the top of the mount. And Jehovah called Moses to the top of the mount, and Moses went up.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Go down, command the people, lest they break through to Jehovah to gaze, and many of them perish.
And let the priests also, who come near to Jehovah, sanctify themselves, lest Jehovah break forth upon them.
And Moses said to Jehovah, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai, for thou commanded us, saying, Set bounds about the mount, and sanctify it.
And Jehovah said to him, Go, get thee down. And thou shall come up, thou, and Aaron with thee, but do not let the priests and the people break through to come up to Jehovah, lest he break forth upon them.
So Moses went down to the people, and told them.

And God spoke all these words, saying,
I am Jehovah thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Thou shall have no other gods before me.
Thou shall not make to thee a graven image, nor any likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is on the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth.
Thou shall not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them, for I, Jehovah thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons, upon the third and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me,
and showing loving kindness to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments.
Thou shall not take the name of Jehovah thy God in vain, for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless who takes his name in vain.
Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy.
Six days thou shall labor, and do all thy work,
but the seventh day is a sabbath to Jehovah thy God. Thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates,
for in six days Jehovah made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested the seventh day. Therefore Jehovah blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.
Honor thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be long in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Thou shall not murder.
Thou shall not commit adultery.
Thou shall not steal.
Thou shall not bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's house. Thou shall not covet thy neighbor's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox, nor his donkey, nor anything that is thy neighbor's.
And all the people perceived the thunderings, and the lightnings, and the voice of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking. And when the people saw it, they trembled, and stood afar off.
And they said to Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear, but let not God speak with us, lest we die.
And Moses said to the people, Fear not, for God has come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye not sin.
And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near to the thick darkness where God was.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Thus thou shall say to the sons of Israel, Ye yourselves have seen that I have talked with you from heaven.
Ye shall not make other gods with me; gods of silver, or gods of gold, ye shall not make to you.
An altar of earth thou shall make to me, and shall sacrifice on it thy burnt offerings, and thy peace offerings, thy sheep, and thine oxen. In every place where I record my name I will come to thee and I will bless thee.
And if thou make to me an altar of stone, thou shall not build it of hewn stones, for if thou lift up thy tool upon it, thou have polluted it.
Neither shall thou go up by steps to my altar, that thy nakedness be not uncovered on it.

Now these are the ordinances which thou shall set before them.
If thou buy a Hebrew servant, six years he shall serve, and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.
If he comes in by himself, he shall go out by himself. If he be married, then his wife shall go out with him.
If his master gives him a wife and she bears him sons or daughters, the wife and her sons shall be her master's, and he shall go out by himself.
But if the servant shall plainly say, I love my master, my wife, and my sons, I will not go out free,
then his master shall bring him to God, and shall bring him to the door, or to the door-post, and his master shall bore his ear through with an awl, and he shall serve him forever.
And if a man sells his daughter to be a maid-servant, she shall not go out as the men-servants do.
If she does not please her master, who has espoused her to himself, then he shall let her be redeemed. He shall have no power to sell her to a foreign people, since he has dealt deceitfully with her.
And if he espouses her to his son, he shall deal with her according to the manner of daughters.
If he takes him another wife, her food, her raiment, and her duty of marriage, he shall not diminish.
And if he does not do these three things to her, then she shall go out for nothing, without money.
He who smites a man, so that he dies, shall surely be put to death.
And if a man does not lie in wait, but God delivers him into his hand, then I will appoint for thee a place where he shall flee.
And if a man comes presumptuously upon his neighbor, to kill him with guile, thou shall take him from my altar, that he may die.
And he who smites his father or his mother, shall surely be put to death.
And he who steals a man, and sells him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall surely be put to death.
And he who curses his father or his mother, shall surely be put to death.
And if men contend, and one smites the other with a stone, or with his fist, and he does not die, but keeps his bed,
if he rises again, and walks abroad upon his staff, then he who smote him shall be acquitted. Only he shall pay for the loss of his time, and shall cause him to be thoroughly healed.
And if a man smites his servant, or his maid, with a rod, and he dies under his hand, he shall surely be punished.
Notwithstanding, if he continues a day or two, he shall not be punished, for he is his money.
And if men strive together, and hurt a woman with child, so that her fruit depart, and yet no harm follow, he shall be surely fined, according as the woman's husband shall lay upon him, and he shall pay as the judges determine.
But if any harm follows, then thou shall give life for life,
eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burning for burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
And if a man smites the eye of his servant, or the eye of his maid, and destroys it, he shall let him go free for his eye's sake.
And if he knocks out his man-servant's tooth, or his maid-servant's tooth, he shall let him go free for his tooth's sake.
And if an ox gores a man or a woman to death, the ox shall surely be stoned, and its flesh shall not be eaten, but the owner of the ox shall be acquitted.
But if the ox was accustomed to gore in time past, and it has been testified to its owner, and he has not kept it in, but it has killed a man or a woman, the ox shall be stoned, and its owner shall also be put to death.
If a ransom is laid on him, then he shall give for the redemption of his life whatever is laid upon him.
Whether it has gored a son, or has gored a daughter, according to this judgment it shall be done to him.
If the ox gores a man-servant or a maid-servant, there shall be given to their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.
And if a man shall open a pit, or if a man shall dig a pit and not cover it, and an ox or a donkey falls in it,
the owner of the pit shall make it good; he shall give money to the owner of it, and the dead beast shall be his.
And if one man's ox hurts another's, so that it dies, then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the price of it, and the dead they shall also divide.
Or if it be known that the ox was accustomed to gore in time past, and its owner has not kept it in, he shall surely pay ox for ox, and the dead beast shall be his own.

If a man shall steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he shall pay five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep.
If the thief is found breaking in, and be smitten so that he dies, there shall be no bloodguiltiness for him.
If the sun be risen upon him, there shall be bloodguiltiness for him. A thief shall make restitution. If he has nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft.
If the theft is found in his hand alive, whether it be ox, or donkey, or sheep, he shall pay double.
If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and shall let his beast loose, and it feeds in another man's field, he shall make restitution of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard.
If fire breaks out, and catches in thorns, so that the shocks of grain, or the standing grain, or the field are consumed, he who kindled the fire shall surely make restitution.
If a man shall deliver to his neighbor money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man's house, if the thief be found, he shall pay double.
If the thief is not found, then the master of the house shall come near to God, to see whether he has not put his hand to his neighbor's goods.
For every matter of trespass, whether it be for ox, for donkey, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner of lost thing, of which a man says, This is it, the case of both parties shall come before God. He whom God shall condemn shall pay double to his neighbor.
If a man delivers to his neighbor a donkey, or an ox, or a sheep, or any beast, to keep, and it dies, or be hurt, or driven away, no man seeing it,
the oath of Jehovah shall be between them both, whether he has not put his hand to his neighbor's goods. And the owner of it shall accept it, and he shall not make restitution.
But if it is stolen from him, he shall make restitution to the owner of it.
If it is torn in pieces, let him bring it for evidence. He shall not make good that which was torn.
And if a man borrows anything of his neighbor, and it be hurt, or die, the owner of it not being with it, he shall surely make restitution.
If the owner of it is with it, he shall not make it good. If it be a hired thing, it came for its hire.
And if a man entices a virgin who is not betrothed, and lies with her, he shall surely pay a dowry for her to be his wife.
If her father utterly refuses to give her to him, he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins.
Thou shall not allow a sorceress to live.
Whoever lies with a beast shall surely be put to death.
He who sacrifices to any god, except to Jehovah only, shall be utterly destroyed.
And thou shall not wrong a sojourner, neither shall thou oppress him, for ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt.
Ye shall not afflict any widow, or fatherless child.
If thou afflict them at all, and they cry at all to me, I will surely hear their cry,
and my wrath shall grow hot, and I will kill you with the sword, and your wives shall be widows, and your sons fatherless.
If thou lend money to any of my people with thee who is poor, thou shall not be to him as a creditor, neither shall ye lay upon him interest.
If thou at all take thy neighbor's garment to pledge, thou shall restore it to him before the sun goes down,
for that is his only covering. It is his garment for his skin. How shall he sleep? And it shall come to pass, when he cries to me, that I will hear, for I am gracious.
Thou shall not revile God, nor speak ill of a ruler of thy people.
Thou shall not delay to offer from thy harvest, and from the outflow of thy presses. The firstborn of thy sons thou shall give to me.
Likewise thou shall do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep. Seven days it shall be with its dam. On the eighth day thou shall give it me.
And ye shall be holy men to me. Therefore ye shall not eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field. Ye shall cast it to the dogs.

Thou shall not take up a false report. Do not put thy hand with the wicked man to be an unrighteous witness.
Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil, neither shall thou speak in a case to turn aside after a multitude to distort justice,
neither shall thou favor a poor man in his case.
If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his donkey going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again.
If thou see the donkey of him who hates thee lying under his burden, thou shall refrain leaving him. Thou shall surely release it with him.
Thou shall not distort the justice due to thy poor in his case.
Keep thee far from a false matter. And do not kill an innocent and righteous man, for I will not justify a wicked man.
And thou shall take no bribe, for a bribe blinds those who have sight, and perverts the words of the righteous.
And thou shall not oppress a sojourner, for ye know the heart of a sojourner, since ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt.
And six years thou shall sow thy land, and shall gather in the increase of it,
but the seventh year thou shall let it rest and lie fallow, that the poor of thy people may eat, and what they leave the beast of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shall deal with thy vineyard, and with thy oliveyard.
Six days thou shall do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shall rest, that thine ox and thy donkey may have rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the sojourner, may be refreshed.
And in all things that I have said to you take ye heed, and make no mention of the name of other gods, neither let it be heard out of thy mouth.
Three times thou shall keep a feast to me in the year.
Thou shall keep the feast of unleavened bread (Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, at the time appointed in the month Abib, for in it thou came out from Egypt, and none shall appear before me empty),
and the feast of harvest, the first-fruits of thy labors, which thou sow in the field, and the feast of ingathering at the end of the year, when thou gather in thy labors out of the field.
Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the lord Jehovah.
Thou shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread, neither shall the fat of my feast remain all night until the morning.
The first of the first-fruits of thy ground thou shall bring into the house of Jehovah thy God. Thou shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
Behold, I send an agent before thee, to keep thee by the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared.
Take ye heed before him, and hearken to his voice, provoke him not. For he will not pardon your transgression, for my name is in him.
But if thou shall indeed hearken to his voice, and do all that I speak, then I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and an adversary to thine adversaries.
For my agent shall go before thee, and bring thee in to the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Canaanite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite, and I will cut them off.
Thou shall not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their works, but thou shall utterly overthrow them, and break their pillars in pieces.
And ye shall serve Jehovah your God, and he will bless thy bread, and thy water, and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee.
There shall none cast her young, nor be barren, in thy land; I will fulfill the number of thy days.
I will send my terror before thee, and will destroy all the people to whom thou shall come, and I will make all thine enemies turn their backs to thee.
And I will send the hornet before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.
I will not drive them out from before thee in one year, lest the land become desolate, and the beasts of the field multiply against thee.
Little by little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou be increased, and inherit the land.
And I will set thy border from the Red Sea even to the sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness to the River. For I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand, and thou shall drive them out before thee.
Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.
They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me, for if thou serve their gods, it will surely be a snare to thee.

And he said to Moses, Come up to Jehovah, thou, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel, and worship ye afar off.
And Moses alone shall come near to Jehovah, but they shall not come near, neither shall the people go up with him.
And Moses came and told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the ordinances. And all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words which Jehovah has spoken will we do.
And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah, and rose up early in the morning, and built an altar below the mount, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
And he sent young men of the sons of Israel, who offered burnt offerings, and sacrificed peace offerings of oxen to Jehovah.
And Moses took half of the blood, and put it in basins, and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
And he took the book of the covenant, and read in the audience of the people. And they said, All that Jehovah has spoken will we do, and be obedient.
And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled it on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words.
Then Moses, and Aaron, Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up.
And they saw the God of Israel. And there was under his feet as it were a paved work of sapphire stone, and as it were the very heaven for clearness.
And he laid not his hand upon the nobles of the sons of Israel. And they beheld God, and ate and drank.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Come up to me onto the mount, and be there, and I will give thee the tablets of stone, and the law and the commandment, which I have written, that thou may teach them.
And Moses rose up, and Joshua his minister, and Moses went up onto the mount of God.
And he said to the elders, Tarry ye here for us, until we come again to you. And, behold, Aaron and Hur are with you; whoever has a case, let him come near to them.
And Moses went up onto the mount, and the cloud covered the mount.
And the glory of Jehovah abode upon mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days. And the seventh day he called to Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
And the appearance of the glory of Jehovah was like devouring fire on the top of the mount in the eyes of the sons of Israel.
And Moses entered into the midst of the cloud, and went up onto the mount. And Moses was on the mount forty days and forty nights.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, that they take for me an offering; of every man whose heart makes him willing ye shall take my offering.
gold, and silver, and brass,
and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair,
and rams' skins dyed red, and certain skins, and acacia wood,
oil for the light, spices for the anointing oil and for the sweet incense,
onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod and for the breastplate.
And let them make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them.
the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the furniture of it, even so shall ye make it.
And they shall make an ark of acacia wood. Two cubits and a half shall be the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it.
And thou shall overlay it with pure gold. Inside and outside thou shall overlay it, and shall make upon it a crown of gold round about.
And thou shall cast four rings of gold for it, and put them in the four feet of it. And two rings shall be on the one side of it, and two rings on the other side of it.
And thou shall make staves of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold.
And thou shall put the staves into the rings on the sides of the ark, with which to bear the ark.
The staves shall be in the rings of the ark; they shall not be taken from it.
And thou shall put into the ark the testimony which I shall give thee.
two cubits and a half the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it.
And thou shall make two cherubim of gold; of beaten work shall thou make them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat.
And make one cherub at the one end, and one cherub at the other end; of one piece with the mercy-seat ye shall make the cherubim on the two ends of it.
And the cherubim shall spread out their wings on high, covering the mercy-seat with their wings, with their faces one to another; the faces of the cherubim shall be toward the mercy-seat.
And thou shall put the mercy-seat above upon the ark. And in the ark thou shall put the testimony that I shall give thee.
And there I will meet with thee. And I will commune with thee from above the mercy-seat, from between the two cherubim which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in commandment to the sons of Israel.
And thou shall make a table of acacia wood, two cubits the length of it, and a cubit the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it.
And thou shall overlay it with pure gold, and make thereto a crown of gold round about.
And thou shall make to it a border of a handbreadth round about, and thou shall make a golden crown to the border of it round about.
And thou shall make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings in the four corners that are on the four feet of it.
The rings shall be close by the border, for places for the staves to bear the table.
And thou shall make the staves of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold, that the table may be borne with them.
And thou shall make the dishes of it, and the spoons of it, and the pitchers of it, and the bowls of it, with which to pour out, of pure gold thou shall make them.
And thou shall set upon the table showbread before me always.
And thou shall make a lampstand of pure gold. Of beaten work shall the lampstand be made, even its base, and its shaft, its cups, its knobs, and its flowers, shall be of one piece with it.
three cups made like almond-blossoms in one branch, a knob and a flower, and three cups made like almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knob and a flower, so for the six branches going out of the lampstand,
and in the lampstand four cups made like almond-blossoms, the knobs of it, and the flowers of it.
And a knob under two branches of one piece with it, and a knob under two branches of one piece with it, and a knob under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going out of the lampstand.
Their knobs and their branches shall be of one piece with it, the whole of it one beaten work of pure gold.
And thou shall make the lamps of it, seven. And they shall light the lamps of it, to give light in front of it.
And the snuffers of it, and the snuff dishes of it, shall be of pure gold.
Of a talent of pure gold shall it be made, with all these vessels.
And see that thou make them according to their pattern that has been shown thee on the mountain.

Moreover thou shall make the tabernacle with ten curtains, of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubim the work of the skilful workman shall thou make them.
The length of each curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits, and the breadth of each curtain four cubits. All the curtains shall have one measure.
Five curtains shall be coupled together one to another, and the other five curtains shall be coupled one to another.
And thou shall make loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling, and likewise thou shall make in the edge of the curtain that is outmost in the second coupling.
Fifty loops thou shall make in the one curtain, and fifty loops thou shall make in the edge of the curtain that is in the second coupling; the loops shall be opposite one to another.
And thou shall make fifty clasps of gold, and couple the curtains one to another with the clasps. And the tabernacle shall be one whole.
And thou shall make curtains of goats' hair for a tent over the tabernacle. Eleven curtains thou shall make them.
The length of each curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of each curtain four cubits. The eleven curtains shall have one measure.
And thou shall couple five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves, and shall double over the sixth curtain in the forefront of the tent.
And thou shall make fifty loops on the edge of the one curtain that is outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops upon the edge of the curtain which is outmost in the second coupling.
And thou shall make fifty clasps of brass, and put the clasps into the loops, and couple the tent together, that it may be one.
And the overhanging part that remains of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remains, shall hang over the back of the tabernacle.
And the cubit on the one side, and the cubit on the other side, of that which remains in the length of the curtains of the tent, shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it.
And thou shall make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of certain skins above.
And thou shall make the boards for the tabernacle of acacia wood, standing up.
Ten cubits shall be the length of a board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of each board.
There shall be two tenons in each board, joined one to another. Thus thou shall make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
And thou shall make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards for the south side southward.
two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons.
And for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, twenty boards,
two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
And for the hinder part of the tabernacle westward thou shall make six boards.
And thou shall make two boards for the corners of the tabernacle in the hinder part.
And they shall be double beneath, and in like manner they shall be entire to the top of it to one ring. Thus shall it be for them both, they shall be for the two corners.
two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle, for the hinder part westward.
And the middle bar in the midst of the boards shall pass through from end to end.
And thou shall overlay the boards with gold, and make their rings of gold for places for the bars. And thou shall overlay the bars with gold.
And thou shall raise up the tabernacle according to the fashion of it which has been shown thee on the mount.
And thou shall make a veil of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. With cherubim the work of the skilful workman shall it be made.
And thou shall hang it upon four pillars of acacia overlaid with gold, their hooks shall be of gold, upon four sockets of silver.
And thou shall hang up the veil under the clasps, and shall bring in there within the veil the ark of the testimony. And the veil shall separate to you between the holy place and the most holy.
And thou shall put the mercy-seat upon the ark of the testimony in the most holy place.
And thou shall set the table outside the veil, and the lampstand opposite the table on the side of the tabernacle toward the south. And thou shall put the table on the north side.
And thou shall make a screen for the door of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the embroiderer.
And thou shall make for the screen five pillars of acacia, and overlay them with gold. Their hooks shall be of gold, and thou shall cast five sockets of brass for them.

And thou shall make the altar of acacia wood, five cubits long, and five cubits broad (the altar shall be foursquare), and the height of it shall be three cubits.
And thou shall make the horns of it upon the four corners of it. The horns of it shall be of one piece with it, and thou shall overlay it with brass.
And thou shall make its pots to take away its ashes, and its shovels, and its basins, and its flesh-hooks, and its firepans; all the vessels of it thou shall make of brass.
And thou shall make for it a grating of network of brass, and upon the network thou shall make four brazen rings in the four corners of it.
And thou shall put it under the ledge round the altar beneath, that the network may reach halfway up the altar.
And thou shall make staves for the altar, staves of acacia wood, and overlay them with brass.
And the staves of it shall be put into the rings, and the staves shall be upon the two sides of the altar, in bearing it.
Thou shall make it hollow with planks. As it has been shown thee on the mount, so shall they make it.
And thou shall make the court of the tabernacle. For the south side southward there shall be hangings for the court of fine twined linen a hundred cubits long for one side.
And the pillars of it shall be twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass. The hooks of the pillars and their bands shall be of silver.
And likewise for the north side in length there shall be hangings a hundred cubits long, and the pillars of it twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass, the hooks of the pillars and their bands, of silver.
And for the breadth of the court on the west side shall be hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten.
And the breadth of the court on the east side eastward shall be fifty cubits.
The hangings for the one side of the gate shall be fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three.
And for the other side shall be hangings of fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three.
And for the gate of the court shall be a screen of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the embroiderer, their pillars four, and their sockets four.
All the pillars of the court round about shall be banded with silver, their hooks of silver, and their sockets of brass.
The length of the court shall be a hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty everywhere, and the height five cubits, of fine twined linen, and their sockets of brass.
All the instruments of the tabernacle in all the service of it, and all the pegs of it, and all the pegs of the court, shall be of brass.
And thou shall command the sons of Israel, that they bring to thee pure beaten olive oil for the light, to cause a lamp to burn continually
in the tent of meeting, outside the veil which is before the testimony. Aaron and his sons shall keep it in order from evening to morning before Jehovah. It shall be a statute forever throughout their generations on the behalf of the sons of Israel.

And bring thou near to thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the sons of Israel, that he may minister to me in the priest's office, even Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.
And thou shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for glory and for beauty.
And thou shall speak to all who are wise-hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they make Aaron's garments to sanctify him, that he may minister to me in the priest's office.
a breastplate, and an ephod, and a robe, and a tunic of checker work, a miter, and a sash. And they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may minister to me in the priest's office.
And they shall take the gold, and the blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, and the fine linen.
And they shall make the ephod of gold, of blue, and purple, scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the skilful workman.
It shall have two shoulder-pieces joined to the two ends of it, that it may be joined together.
And the skillfully woven band, which is upon it, with which to gird it on, shall be like the work of it and of the same piece, of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
six of their names on the one stone, and the names of the six that remain on the other stone, according to their birth.
With the work of an engraver in stone, like the engravings of a signet, thou shall engrave the two stones, according to the names of the sons of Israel. Thou shall make them to be enclosed in settings of gold.
And thou shall put the two stones upon the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the sons of Israel. And Aaron shall bear their names before Jehovah upon his two shoulders for a memorial.
And thou shall make settings of gold,
and two chains of pure gold, like cords shall thou make them, of wreathen work. And thou shall put the wreathen chains on the settings.
of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, thou shall make it.
It shall be foursquare and double, a span shall be the length of it, and a span the breadth of it.
a row of sardius, topaz, and carbuncle shall be the first row,
and the second row an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond,
and the third row a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst,
and the fourth row a beryl, and an onyx, and a jasper. They shall be enclosed in gold in their settings.
And the stones shall be according to the names of the sons of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, every one according to his name; they shall be for the twelve tribes.
And thou shall make upon the breastplate chains like cords, of wreathen work of pure gold.
And thou shall make upon the breastplate two rings of gold, and shall put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
And thou shall put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings at the ends of the breastplate.
And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains thou shall put on the two settings, and put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod in the forepart of it.
And thou shall make two rings of gold, and thou shall put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, upon the edge of it, which is toward the side of the ephod inward.
And thou shall make two rings of gold, and shall put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, in the forepart of it, close by the coupling of it, above the skillfully woven band of the ephod.
And they shall bind the breastplate by the rings of it to the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be upon the skillfully woven band of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.
And Aaron shall bear the names of the sons of Israel in the breastplate of judgment upon his heart, when he goes in to the holy place, for a memorial before Jehovah continually.
And thou shall put in the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim, and they shall be upon Aaron's heart, when he goes in before Jehovah. And Aaron shall bear the judgment of the sons of Israel upon his heart before Jehovah continually.
And thou shall make the robe of the ephod all of blue.
And it shall have a hole for the head in the midst of it. It shall have a binding of woven work round about the hole of it, as it were the hole of a coat of mail, that it be not torn.
a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the robe round about.
And it shall be upon Aaron to minister. And the sound of it shall be heard when he goes in to the holy place before Jehovah, and when he comes out, that he does not die.
And thou shall make a plate of pure gold, and engrave upon it, like the engravings of a signet, HOLY TO JEHOVAH.
And thou shall put it on a lace of blue, and it shall be upon the miter. It shall be upon the forefront of the miter.
And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead. And Aaron shall bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the sons of Israel shall hallow in all their holy gifts. And it shall always be upon his forehead, that they may be accepted before Jehovah.
And thou shall weave the tunic in checker work of fine linen. And thou shall make a miter of fine linen. And thou shall make a sash, the work of the embroiderer.
And for Aaron's sons thou shall make tunics. And thou shall make for them sashes, and head-coverings thou shall make for them, for glory and for beauty.
And thou shall put them upon Aaron thy brother, and upon his sons with him, and shall anoint them, and consecrate them, and sanctify them, that they may minister to me in the priest's office.
And thou shall make for them linen breeches to cover the flesh of their nakedness, from the loins even to the thighs they shall reach.
And they shall be upon Aaron, and upon his sons, when they go in to the tent of meeting, or when they come near to the altar to minister in the holy place, that they not bear iniquity, and die. It shall be a statute forever to him and to his seed after him.

Take one young bullock and two rams without blemish,
and unleavened bread, and cakes unleavened mingled with oil, and wafers unleavened anointed with oil, of fine wheaten flour shall thou make them,
and thou shall put them into one basket, and bring them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.
And Aaron and his sons thou shall bring to the door of the tent of meeting, and shall wash them with water.
And thou shall take the garments, and put upon Aaron the tunic, and the robe of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and gird him with the skillfully woven band of the ephod.
And thou shall set the miter upon his head, and put the holy crown upon the miter.
Then thou shall take the anointing oil, and pour it upon his head, and anoint him.
And thou shall bring his sons, and put tunics upon them.
And thou shall gird them with sashes, Aaron and his sons, and bind head-coverings on them. And they shall have the priesthood by a perpetual statute. And thou shall consecrate Aaron and his sons.
And thou shall bring the bullock before the tent of meeting. And Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock,
and thou shall kill the bullock before Jehovah, at the door of the tent of meeting.
And thou shall take of the blood of the bullock, and put it upon the horns of the altar with thy finger, and thou shall pour out all the blood at the base of the altar.
And thou shall take all the fat that covers the inwards, and the caul upon the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.
But the flesh of the bullock, and its skin, and it dung, thou shall burn with fire outside the camp. It is a sin offering.
Thou shall also take the one ram, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram.
And thou shall slay the ram, and thou shall take its blood, and sprinkle it round about upon the altar.
And thou shall cut the ram into its pieces, and wash its inwards, and its legs, and put them with its pieces, and with its head,
and thou shall burn the whole ram upon the altar. It is a burnt offering to Jehovah. It is a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And thou shall take the other ram, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram.
Then thou shall kill the ram, and take of its blood, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of Aaron, and upon the tip of the right ear of his sons, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot, and sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
And thou shall take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle it upon Aaron, and upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon the garments of his sons with him. And he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him.
Also thou shall take from the ram the fat, and the fat tail, and the fat that covers the inwards, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right thigh (for it is a ram of consecration),
and one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, out of the basket of unleavened bread that is before Jehovah,
and thou shall put the whole upon the hands of Aaron, and upon the hands of his sons, and shall wave them for a wave offering before Jehovah.
And thou shall take them from their hands, and burn them on the altar upon the burnt offering, for a sweet savor before Jehovah. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And thou shall take the breast of Aaron's ram of consecration, and wave it for a wave offering before Jehovah, and it shall be thy portion.
And thou shall sanctify the breast of the wave offering, and the thigh of the heave offering, which is waved, and which is heaved up, of the ram of consecration, even of that which is for Aaron, and of that which is for his sons,
and it shall be for Aaron and his sons as their portion forever from the sons of Israel, for it is a heave offering. And it shall be a heave offering from the sons of Israel of the sacrifices of their peace offerings, even their heave offering to Jehovah.
And the holy garments of Aaron shall be for his sons after him, to be anointed in them, and to be consecrated in them.
Seven days shall the son that is priest in his stead put them on, when he comes into the tent of meeting to minister in the holy place.
And thou shall take the ram of consecration, and boil its flesh in a holy place.
And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, at the door of the tent of meeting.
And they shall eat those things with which atonement was made, to consecrate and to sanctify them, but a stranger shall not eat of it, because they are holy.
And if any of the flesh of the consecration, or of the bread, remains to the morning, then thou shall burn the remainder with fire. It shall not be eaten, because it is holy.
And thus thou shall do to Aaron, and to his sons, according to all that I have commanded thee. Seven days thou shall consecrate them.
And every day thou shall offer the bullock of sin offering for atonement. And thou shall cleanse the altar when thou make atonement for it, and thou shall anoint it, to sanctify it.
Seven days thou shall make atonement for the altar, and sanctify it. And the altar shall be most holy. Whatever touches the altar shall be holy.
two lambs a year old day by day continually.
The one lamb thou shall offer in the morning, and the other lamb thou shall offer at evening.
And with the one lamb a tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of beaten oil, and the fourth part of a hin of wine for a drink offering.
And the other lamb thou shall offer at evening, and shall do thereto according to the meal offering of the morning, and according to the drink offering of it, for a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
It shall be a continual burnt offering throughout your generations at the door of the tent of meeting before Jehovah, where I will meet with you, to speak to thee there.
And there I will meet with the sons of Israel, and the tent shall be sanctified by my glory.
And I will sanctify the tent of meeting, and the altar. I will also sanctify Aaron and his sons to minister to me in the priest's office.
And I will dwell among the sons of Israel, and will be their God.
And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God, who brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, that I might dwell among them. I am Jehovah their God.

And thou shall make an altar to burn incense upon. Thou shall make it of acacia wood.
A cubit shall be the length of it, and a cubit the breadth of it (it shall be foursquare), and two cubits shall be the height of it. The horns of it shall be of one piece with it.
And thou shall overlay it with pure gold, the top of it, and the sides of it round about, and the horns of it. And thou shall make to it a crown of gold round about.
And two golden rings thou shall make for it under the crown of it, upon the two ribs of it, upon the two sides of it thou shall make them. And they shall be for places for staves with which to bear it.
And thou shall make the staves of acacia wood, and overlay them with gold.
And thou shall put it before the veil that is by the ark of the testimony, before the mercy-seat that is over the testimony, where I will meet with thee.
And Aaron shall burn in it incense of sweet spices. Every morning, when he dresses the lamps, he shall burn it.
And when Aaron lights the lamps at evening, he shall burn it, a perpetual incense before Jehovah throughout your generations.
Ye shall offer no strange incense on it, nor burnt offering, nor meal offering. And ye shall pour no drink offering on it.
And Aaron shall make atonement upon the horns of it once in the year, with the blood of the sin offering of atonement. Once in the year he shall make atonement for it throughout your generations. It is most holy to Jehovah.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
When thou take the sum of the sons of Israel, according to those who are numbered of them, then they shall give every man a ransom for his soul to Jehovah when thou number them, that there be no plague among them when thou number them.
half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary, (the shekel is twenty gerahs,) half a shekel for an offering to Jehovah.
Everyone who passes over to those who are numbered, from twenty years old and upward, shall give the offering of Jehovah.
The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less, than the half shekel, when they give the offering of Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.
And thou shall take the atonement money from the sons of Israel, and shall appoint it for the service of the tent of meeting, that it may be a memorial for the sons of Israel before Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Thou shall also make a laver of brass, and the base of it of brass for washing. And thou shall put it between the tent of meeting and the altar, and thou shall put water in it.
And Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet there.
When they go into the tent of meeting, they shall wash with water, that they not die, or when they come near to the altar to minister, to burn an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they not die. And it shall be a statute forever to them, even to him and to his seed throughout their generations.
Moreover Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
of flowing myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty, and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty,
and of cassia five hundred, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of olive oil a hin.
And thou shall make it a holy anointing oil, a perfume compounded after the art of the perfumer. It shall be a holy anointing oil.
And thou shall anoint with it the tent of meeting, and the ark of the testimony,
and the table and all the vessels of it, and the lampstand and the vessels of it, and the altar of incense,
and the altar of burnt offering with all the vessels of it, and the laver and the base of it.
And thou shall sanctify them, that they may be most holy. Whatever touches them shall be holy.
And thou shall anoint Aaron and his sons, and sanctify them, that they may minister to me in the priest's office.
And thou shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, This shall be a holy anointing oil to me throughout your generations.
Upon the flesh of man it shall not be poured, neither shall ye make any like it, according to the composition of it. It is holy, and it shall be holy to you.
Whoever compounds any like it, or whoever puts any of it upon a stranger, he shall be cut off from his people.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Take to thee sweet spices, stacte, and onycha, and galbanum, sweet spices with pure frankincense, of each shall there be a like weight.
And thou shall make of it incense, a perfume after the art of the perfumer, seasoned with salt, pure and holy.
And thou shall beat some of it very small, and put of it before the testimony in the tent of meeting, where I will meet with thee. It shall be to you most holy.
And the incense which thou shall make, ye shall not make for yourselves according to the composition of it. It shall be to thee holy for Jehovah.
Whoever shall make like that, to smell of it, he shall be cut off from his people.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
See, I have called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
and I have filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
to devise skilful works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
and in cutting of stones for setting, and in carving of wood, to work in all manner of workmanship.
the tent of meeting, and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy-seat that is on it, and all the furniture of the tent,
and the table and its vessels, and the pure lampstand with all its vessels, and the altar of incense,
and the altar of burnt offering with all its vessels, and the laver and its base,
and the finely wrought garments, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office,
and the anointing oil, and the incense of sweet spices for the holy place. According to all that I have commanded thee they shall do.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak thou also to the sons of Israel, saying, Truly ye shall keep my sabbaths, for it is a sign between me and you throughout your generations, that ye may know that I am Jehovah who sanctifies you.
Ye shall keep the sabbath therefore, for it is holy to you. Everyone who profanes it shall surely be put to death, for whoever does any work on it, that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, holy to Jehovah. Whoever does any work on the sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death.
Therefore the sons of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations, for a perpetual covenant.
It is a sign between me and the sons of Israel forever. For in six days Jehovah made heaven and earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.
And he gave to Moses, when he had made an end of communing with him upon mount Sinai, the two tablets of the testimony, tablets of stone, written with the finger of God.

And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the mount, the people gathered themselves together to Aaron, and said to him, Up, make gods for us, which shall go before us. For as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we know not what has become of him.
And Aaron said to them, Break off the golden rings, which are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring them to me.
And all the people broke off the golden rings which were in their ears, and brought them to Aaron.
And he received it at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, and made it a molten calf. And they said, These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And when Aaron saw this, he built an altar before it. And Aaron made proclamation, and said, Tomorrow shall be a feast to Jehovah.
And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offerings. And the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to revel.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, Go, get thee down. For thy people, that thou brought up out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves.
They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded them. They have made for them a molten calf, and have worshiped it, and have sacrificed to it, and said, These are thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And Jehovah said to Moses, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiff-necked people.
Now therefore let me alone, that my wrath may grow hot against them, and that I may consume them. And I will make of thee a great nation.
And Moses besought Jehovah his God, and said, Jehovah, why does thy wrath grow hot against thy people, whom thou have brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a mighty hand?
Why should the Egyptians speak, saying, He brought them forth for evil, to kill them on the mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce wrath, and relent of this evil against thy people.
Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swore by thine own self, and said to them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven. And all this land that I have spoken of I will give to your seed, and they shall inherit it forever.
And Jehovah relented of the evil which he said he would do to his people.
And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, with the two tablets of the testimony in his hand, tablets that were written on both their sides; on the one side and on the other were they written.
And the tablets were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God, engraved upon the tablets.
And when Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said to Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.
And he said, It is not the voice of those who shout for mastery, neither is it the voice of those who cry for being overcome, but the noise of those who sing do I hear.
And it came to pass, as soon as he came near to the camp, that he saw the calf and the dancing. And Moses' anger grew hot, and he cast the tablets out of his hands, and broke them beneath the mount.
And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it with fire, and ground it to powder, and scattered it upon the water, and made the sons of Israel drink of it.
And Moses said to Aaron, What did this people do to thee, that thou have brought a great sin upon them?
And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord grow hot. Thou know the people, that they are set on evil.
For they said to me, Make gods for us, which shall go before us. For as for this Moses, the man who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we know not what has become of him.
And I said to them, Whoever has any gold, let them break it off. So they gave it to me, and I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.
And when Moses saw that the people were broken loose, (for Aaron had let them loose for a derision among their enemies,)
then Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, Whoever is on Jehovah's side, come to me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together to him.
And he said to them, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Put ye every man his sword upon his thigh, and go to and fro from gate to gate throughout the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every man his neighbor.
And the sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses. And there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.
And Moses said, Consecrate yourselves today to Jehovah, yea, every man against his son, and against his brother, that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said to the people, Ye have sinned a great sin. And now I will go up to Jehovah, perhaps I shall make atonement for your sin.
And Moses returned to Jehovah, and said, Oh, this people have sinned a great sin, and have made gods of gold for them.
Yet now, if thou will forgive their sin-, and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book which thou have written.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Whoever has sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.
And now go, lead the people to the place of which I have spoken to thee. Behold, my agent shall go before thee. Nevertheless in the day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them.
And Jehovah smote the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron made.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, Depart, go up from here, thou and the people that thou have brought up out of the land of Egypt, to the land of which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, To thy seed will I give it.
And I will send an agent before thee, and I will drive out the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite-
to a land flowing with milk and honey. For I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou are a stiff-necked people, lest I consume thee on the way.
And when the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned, and no man put his ornaments on him.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Say to the sons of Israel, Ye are a stiff-necked people. If I go up into the midst of thee for one moment, I shall consume thee. Therefore now put off thy ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do to thee.
And the sons of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments from mount Horeb onward.
Now Moses used to take the tent and to pitch it outside the camp, afar off from the camp, and he called it, The tent of meeting. And it came to pass, that everyone who sought Jehovah went out to the tent of meeting, which was outside the camp.
And it came to pass, when Moses went out to the tent, that all the people rose up, and stood, every man at his tent door, and looked after Moses, until he was gone into the tent.
And it came to pass, when Moses entered into the tent, the pillar of cloud descended, and stood at the door of the tent, and Jehovah spoke with Moses.
And all the people saw the pillar of cloud stand at the door of the tent. And all the people rose up and worshiped, every man at his tent door.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses face to face, as a man speaks to his friend, and he turned again into the camp. But his minister Joshua, the son of Nun, a young man, did not depart out of the tent.
And Moses said to Jehovah, See, thou say to me, Bring up this people, and thou have not let me know whom thou will send with me. Yet thou have said, I know thee by name, and thou have also found favor in my sight.
Now therefore, I pray thee, if I have found favor in thy sight, show me now thy ways, that I may know thee, to the end that I may find favor in thy sight. And consider that this nation is thy people.
And he said, My presence shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest.
And Moses said to him, If thy presence go not, do not carry us up from here.
For how shall it now be known that I have found favor in thy sight, I and thy people? Is it not in that thou go with us, so that we are separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are upon the face of the earth?
And Jehovah said to Moses, I will do this thing also that thou have spoken, for thou have found favor in my sight, and I know thee by name.
And he said, Show me, I pray thee, thy glory.
And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and will proclaim the name of Jehovah before thee. I will be merciful to whom I may be merciful, and I will be compassionate to whomever I may be compassionate.
And he said, Thou cannot see my face, for man shall not see me and live.
And Jehovah said, Behold, there is a place by me, and thou shall stand upon the rock.
And it shall come to pass, while my glory passes by, that I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand until I have passed by.
And I will take away my hand, and thou shall see my back, but my face shall not be seen.

And Jehovah said to Moses, Hew thee two tablets of stone like the first, and I will write upon the tablets the words that were on the first tablets, which thou broke.
And be ready by the morning, and come up in the morning to mount Sinai, and present thyself there to me on the top of the mount.
And no man shall come up with thee, neither let any man be seen throughout all the mount, neither let the flocks nor herds feed before that mount.
And he hewed two tablets of stone like the first. And Moses rose up early in the morning, and went up to mount Sinai, as Jehovah had commanded him, and took in his hand two tablets of stone.
And Jehovah descended in the cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed the name of Jehovah.
And Jehovah passed by before him, and proclaimed, Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in loving kindness and truth,
keeping loving kindness for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, and who will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons, and upon the sons's sons, upon the third and upon the fourth generation.
And Moses made haste, and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshiped.
And he said, If now I have found favor in thy sight, O Lord, let the Lord, I pray thee, go in the midst of us, for it is a stiff-necked people, and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for thine inheritance.
And he said, Behold, I make a covenant. Before all thy people I will do marvels, such as have not been wrought in all the earth, nor in any nation, and all the people among which thou are shall see the work of Jehovah, for it is an awesome thing that I do with thee.
Observe thou that which I command thee this day. Behold, I drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
Take heed to thyself, lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land where thou go, lest it be for a snare in the midst of thee.
But ye shall break down their altars, and dash in pieces their pillars, and ye shall cut down their Asherim,
for thou shall worship no other god. For Jehovah, whose name is Jealous, is a jealous God.
Lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and they play the harlot after their gods, and sacrifice to their gods, and a man calls thee and thou eat of his sacrifice,
and thou take of their daughters to thy sons, and their daughters play the harlot after their gods, and make thy sons play the harlot after their gods.
Thou shall make thee no molten gods.
Thou shall keep the feast of unleavened bread. Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread, as I commanded thee, at the time appointed in the month Abib, for in the month Abib thou came out from Egypt.
All that opens the womb is mine, and all thy cattle that is male, the firstlings of cow and sheep.
And the firstling of a donkey thou shall redeem with a lamb, and if thou will not redeem it, then thou shall break its neck. All the firstborn of thy sons thou shall redeem. And none shall appear before me empty.
Six days thou shall work, but on the seventh day thou shall rest; in plowing time and in harvest thou shall rest.
And thou shall observe the feast of weeks, even of the first-fruits of wheat harvest, and the feast of ingathering in the middle of the year.
Three times in the year all thy males shall appear before the lord Jehovah, the God of Israel.
For I will cast out nations before thee, and enlarge thy borders. Neither shall any man desire thy land, when thou go up to appear before Jehovah thy God three times in the year.
Thou shall not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread, nor shall the sacrifice of the feast of the Passover be left to the morning.
The first of the first-fruits of thy ground thou shall bring to the house of Jehovah thy God. Thou shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Write thou these words, for after the tenor of these words I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel.
And he was there with Jehovah forty days and forty nights. He neither ate bread, nor drank water, and he wrote upon the tablets the words of the covenant, the ten commandments.
And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai with the two tablets of the testimony in Moses' hand, when he came down from the mount, that Moses did not know that the skin of his face shone by reason of his speaking with him.
And when Aaron and all the sons of Israel saw Moses, behold, the skin of his face shone, and they were afraid to come near him.
And Moses called to them. And Aaron and all the rulers of the congregation returned to him, and Moses spoke to them.
And afterward all the sons of Israel came near, and he gave them in commandment all that Jehovah had spoken with him on mount Sinai.
And when Moses was done speaking with them, he put a veil on his face.
But when Moses went in before Jehovah to speak with him, he took the veil off, until he came out. And he came out, and spoke to the sons of Israel that which he was commanded.
And the sons of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face shone. And Moses put the veil upon his face again until he went in to speak with him.

And Moses assembled all the congregation of the sons of Israel, and said to them, These are the words which Jehovah has commanded, that ye should do them.
Six days work shall be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of solemn rest to Jehovah. Whoever does any work in it shall be put to death.
Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations upon the sabbath day.
And Moses spoke to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, saying, This is the thing which Jehovah commanded, saying,
gold, and silver, and brass,
and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair,
and rams' skins dyed red, and certain skins, and acacia wood,
and oil for the light, and spices for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense,
and onyx stones, and stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate.
the tabernacle, its tent, and its covering, its clasps, and its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its sockets,
the ark, and the staves of it, the mercy-seat, and the veil of the screen,
the table, and its staves, and all its vessels, and the showbread,
the lampstand also for the light, and its vessels, and its lamps, and the oil for the light,
and the altar of incense, and its staves, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the screen for the door, at the door of the tabernacle,
the altar of burnt offering, with its grating of brass, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its base,
the hangings of the court, the pillars of it, and their sockets, and the screen for the gate of the court,
the pegs of the tabernacle, and the pegs of the court, and their cords,
the finely wrought garments, for ministering in the holy place, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.
And all the congregation of the sons of Israel departed from the presence of Moses.
And they came, everyone whose heart stirred him up, and everyone whom his spirit made willing, and brought Jehovah's offering, for the work of the tent of meeting, and for all the service of it, and for the holy garments.
And they came, both men and women, as many as were willing-hearted, and brought brooches, and earrings, and signet-rings, and armlets, all jewels of gold, even every man who offered an offering of gold to Jehovah.
And every man, with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine linen, and goats' hair, and rams' skins dyed red, and certain skins, brought them.
Everyone who offered an offering of silver and brass brought Jehovah's offering, and every man, with whom was found acacia wood for any work of the service, brought it.
the blue, and the purple, the scarlet, and the fine linen.
And all the women whose heart stirred them up in wisdom spun the goats' hair.
And the rulers brought the onyx stones, and the stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate,
and the spice, and the oil, for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the sweet incense.
The sons of Israel brought a freewill offering to Jehovah, every man and woman, whose heart made them willing to bring for all the work, which Jehovah had commanded to be made by Moses.
And Moses said to the sons of Israel, See, Jehovah has called by name Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah.
And he has filled him with the Spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
and to devise skilful works, to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass,
and in cutting of stones for setting, and in carving of wood, to work in all manner of skilful workmanship.
And he has put in his heart that he may teach, both he, and Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan.
He has filled them with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of workmanship, of the engraver, and of the skilful workman, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in fine linen, and of the weaver, even of those who do any workmanship, and of those who devise skilful works.

And Bezalel and Oholiab shall work, and every wise-hearted man, in whom Jehovah has put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all the work for the service of the sanctuary, according to all that Jehovah has commanded.
And Moses called Bezalel and Oholiab, and every wise-hearted man, in whose heart Jehovah had put wisdom, even everyone whose heart stirred him up to come to the work to do it,
and they received from Moses all the offering which the sons of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, with which to make it. And they brought yet to him freewill offerings every morning.
And all the wise men, who wrought all the work of the sanctuary, came every man from his work which they wrought.
And they spoke to Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work which Jehovah commanded to make.
And Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed throughout the camp, saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the offering of the sanctuary. So the people were restrained from bringing.
For the stuff they had was sufficient for all the work to make it, and too much.
And all the wise-hearted men among them who wrought the work made the tabernacle with ten curtains, of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, with cherubim; the work of the skilful workman made them.
The length of each curtain was twenty-eight cubits, and the breadth of each curtain four cubits. All the curtains had one measure.
And he coupled five curtains one to another, and the other five curtains he coupled one to another.
And he made loops of blue upon the edge of the one curtain from the selvedge in the coupling. Likewise he made in the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the second coupling.
Fifty loops he made in the one curtain, and fifty loops he made in the edge of the curtain that was in the second coupling; the loops were opposite one to another.
And he made fifty clasps of gold, and coupled the curtains one to another with the clasps, so the tabernacle was one.
And he made curtains of goats' hair for a tent over the tabernacle. Eleven curtains he made them.
The length of each curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits the breadth of each curtain. The eleven curtains had one measure.
And he coupled five curtains by themselves, and six curtains by themselves.
And he made fifty loops on the edge of the curtain that was outmost in the coupling, and fifty loops he made upon the edge of the curtain which was outmost in the second coupling.
And he made fifty clasps of brass to couple the tent together, that it might be one.
And he made a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of certain skins above.
And he made the boards for the tabernacle, of acacia wood, standing up.
Ten cubits was the length of a board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of each board.
Each board had two tenons, joined one to another. Thus he made for all the boards of the tabernacle.
And he made the boards for the tabernacle. Twenty boards for the south side southward.
And he made forty sockets of silver under the twenty boards, two sockets under one board for its two tenons, and two sockets under another board for its two tenons.
And for the second side of the tabernacle, on the north side, he made twenty boards,
and their forty sockets of silver, two sockets under one board, and two sockets under another board.
And for the hinder part of the tabernacle westward he made six boards.
And he made two boards for the corners of the tabernacle in the hinder part.
And they were double beneath, and in like manner they were entire to the top of it to one ring. Thus he did to both of them in the two corners.
And there were eight boards, and their sockets of silver, sixteen sockets, under every board two sockets.
And he made bars of acacia wood, five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle for the hinder part westward.
And he made the middle bar to pass through in the midst of the boards from the one end to the other.
And he overlaid the boards with gold. And made their rings of gold for places for the bars, and overlaid the bars with gold.
And he made the veil of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. He made it with cherubim, the work of the skilful workman.
And he made for it four pillars of acacia, and overlaid them with gold. Their hooks were of gold, and he cast for them four sockets of silver.
And he made a screen for the door of the tent, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, the work of the embroiderer,
and the five pillars of it with their hooks. And he overlaid their capitals and their bands with gold, and their five sockets were of brass.

And Bezalel made the ark of acacia wood; two cubits and a half was the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it.
And he overlaid it with pure gold inside and outside, and made a crown of gold to it round about.
And he cast four rings of gold for it, in the four feet of it, even two rings on the one side of it, and two rings on the other side of it.
And he made staves of acacia wood, and overlaid them with gold.
And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the ark, to bear the ark.
And he made a mercy-seat of pure gold, two cubits and a half the length of it, and a cubit and a half the breadth of it.
And he made two cherubim of gold, of beaten work he made them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat,
one cherub at the one end, and one cherub at the other end, of one piece with the mercy-seat. He made the cherubim at the two ends of it.
And the cherubim spread out their wings on high, covering the mercy-seat with their wings, with their faces one to another. The faces of the cherubim were toward the mercy-seat.
And he made the table of acacia wood, two cubits the length of it, and a cubit the breadth of it, and a cubit and a half the height of it.
And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made thereunto a crown of gold round about.
And he made to it a border of a handbreadth round about, and made a golden crown to the border of it round about.
And he cast four rings of gold for it, and put the rings in the four corners that were on the four feet of it,
close by the border were the rings, the places for the staves to bear the table.
And he made the staves of acacia wood, and overlaid them with gold, to bear the table.
And he made the vessels which were upon the table, the dishes of it, and the spoons of it, and the bowls of it, and the flagons of it, with which to pour out, of pure gold.
And he made the lampstand of pure gold. He made the lampstand of beaten work, even its base, and its shaft, its cups, its knobs, and its flowers, were of one piece with it.
And there were six branches going out of the sides of it, three branches of the lampstand out of the one side of it, and three branches of the lampstand out of the other side of it,
three cups made like almond-blossoms in one branch, a knob and a flower, and three cups made like almond-blossoms in the other branch, a knob and a flower, so for the six branches going out of the lampstand.
And in the lampstand were four cups made like almond-blossoms, the knobs of it, and the flowers of it,
and a knob under two branches of one piece with it, and a knob under two branches of one piece with it, and a knob under two branches of one piece with it, for the six branches going out of it.
Their knobs and their branches were of one piece with it. The whole of it was one beaten work of pure gold.
And he made the lamps of it, seven, and the snuffers of it, and the snuff dishes of it, of pure gold.
He made it of a talent of pure gold, and all the vessels of it.
a cubit was the length of it, and a cubit the breadth of it, foursquare, and two cubits was the height of it. The horns of it were of one piece with it.
And he overlaid it with pure gold, the top of it, and the sides of it round about, and the horns of it. And he made to it a crown of gold round about.
And he made for it two golden rings under the crown of it, upon the two ribs of it, upon the two sides of it, for places for staves with which to bear it.
And he made the staves of acacia wood, and overlaid them with gold.
And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of sweet spices, after the art of the perfumer.

five cubits was the length of it, and five cubits the breadth of it, foursquare, and three cubits the height of it.
And he made the horns of it upon the four corners of it. The horns of it were of one piece with it, and he overlaid it with brass.
the pots, and the shovels, and the basins, the flesh-hooks, and the firepans. All the vessels of it he made of brass.
And he made for the altar a grating of network of brass, under the ledge around it beneath, reaching halfway up.
And he cast four rings for the four ends of the grating of brass, to be places for the staves.
And he made the staves of acacia wood, and overlaid them with brass.
And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, with which to bear it; he made it hollow with planks.
And he made the laver of brass, and the base of it of brass, from the mirrors of the women who fasted, who fasted by the doors of the tabernacle of witness, in the day in which he set it up.
And he made the court. For the south side southward the hangings of the court were of fine twined linen, a hundred cubits,
their pillars were twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass. The hooks of the pillars and their bands were of silver.
And for the north side a hundred cubits, their pillars twenty, and their sockets twenty, of brass, the hooks of the pillars, and their bands, of silver.
And for the west side were hangings of fifty cubits, their pillars ten, and their sockets ten, the hooks of the pillars, and their bands, of silver.
And for the east side eastward fifty cubits.
The hangings for the one side of the gate were fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three,
and so for the other side. On this hand and that hand by the gate of the court were hangings of fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their sockets three.
All the hangings of the court round about were of fine twined linen.
And the sockets for the pillars were of brass, the hooks of the pillars, and their bands, of silver, and the overlaying of their capitals, of silver. And all the pillars of the court were banded with silver.
And the screen for the gate of the court was the work of the embroiderer, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen. And twenty cubits was the length, and the height in the breadth was five cubits, answerable to the hangings of the court.
And their pillars were four, and their sockets four, of brass, their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their capitals, and their bands, of silver.
And all the pegs of the tabernacle, and of the court round about, were of brass.
This is the sum of the tabernacle, even the tabernacle of the testimony, as they were counted, according to the commandment of Moses, for the service of the Levites, by the hand of Ithamar, the son of Aaron the priest.
And Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that Jehovah commanded Moses.
And with him was Oholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver, and a skilful workman, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and in fine linen.
All the gold that was used for the work in all the work of the sanctuary, even the gold of the offering, was twenty-nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
And the silver from those who were numbered of the congregation was a hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and seventy-five shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary,
a beka a head, that is, half a shekel, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for everyone who passed over to those who were numbered, from twenty years old and upward, for six hundred and three thousand and five hundred and fifty men.
And the hundred talents of silver were for casting the sockets of the sanctuary, and the sockets of the veil, a hundred sockets for the hundred talents, a talent for a socket.
And of the thousand seven hundred seventy-five shekels he made hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their capitals, and made bands for them.
And the brass of the offering was seventy talents, and two thousand and four hundred shekels.
And with it he made the sockets to the door of the tent of meeting, and the brazen altar, and the brazen grating for it, and all the vessels of the altar,
and the sockets of the court round about, and the sockets of the gate of the court, and all the pegs of the tabernacle, and all the pegs of the court round about.

And of the blue, and purple, and scarlet, they made finely wrought garments, for ministering in the holy place, and made the holy garments for Aaron, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
And they beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it into wires, to work it in the blue, and in the purple, and in the scarlet, and in the fine linen, the work of the skilful workman.
They made shoulder-pieces for it, joined together. It was joined together at the two ends.
And the skillfully woven band, that was upon it with which to gird it on, was of the same piece and like the work of it, of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And they wrought the onyx stones, enclosed in settings of gold, engraved with the engravings of a signet, according to the names of the sons of Israel.
And he put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, to be stones of memorial for the sons of Israel, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he made the breastplate, the work of the skilful workman, like the work of the ephod, of gold, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and fine twined linen.
It was foursquare. They made the breastplate double; a span was the length of it, and a span the breadth of it, being double.
And they set four rows of stones in it. A row of sardius, topaz, and carbuncle was the first row,
and the second row, an emerald, a sapphire, and a diamond,
and the third row, a jacinth, an agate, and an amethyst,
and the fourth row, a beryl, an onyx, and a jasper. They were set in enclosures of gold in their settings.
And the stones were according to the names of the sons of Israel, twelve, according to their names, like the engravings of a signet, each one according to his name, for the twelve tribes.
And they made upon the breastplate chains like cords, of wreathen work of pure gold.
And they made two settings of gold, and two gold rings, and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
And they put the two wreathen chains of gold in the two rings at the ends of the breastplate.
And the other two ends of the two wreathen chains they put on the two settings, and put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, in the forepart of it.
And they made two rings of gold, and put them upon the two ends of the breastplate, upon the edge of it, which was toward the side of the ephod inward.
And they made two rings of gold, and put them on the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, in the forepart of it, close by the coupling of it, above the skillfully woven band of the ephod.
And they bound the breastplate by the rings of it to the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it might be upon the skillfully woven band of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he made the robe of the ephod of woven work, all of blue.
And the hole of the robe in the midst of it, as the hole of a coat of mail, with a binding round about the hole of it, that it should not be torn.
And they made upon the skirts of the robe pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, twined.
And they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates upon the skirts of the robe round about, between the pomegranates,
a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, upon the skirts of the robe round about, to minister in, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And they made the tunics of fine linen of woven work for Aaron, and for his sons,
and the miter of fine linen, and the goodly head-coverings of fine linen, and the linen breeches of fine twined linen,
and the sash of fine twined linen, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, the work of the embroiderer, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And they made the plate of the holy crown of pure gold, and wrote upon it a writing, like the engravings of a signet, HOLY TO JEHOVAH.
And they tied to it a lace of blue, to fasten it upon the miter above, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Thus was finished all the work of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting. And the sons of Israel did according to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so did they.
its clasps, its boards, it bars, and its pillars, and it sockets,
and the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the covering of certain skins, and the veil of the screen,
the ark of the testimony, and the staves of it, and the mercy-seat,
the table, all the vessels of it, and the showbread,
the pure lampstand, the lamps of it, even the lamps to be set in order, and all the vessels of it, and the oil for the light,
and the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the sweet incense, and the screen for the door of the tent,
the brazen altar, and its grating of brass, its staves, and all its vessels, the laver and its base,
the hangings of the court, its pillars, and its sockets, and the screen for the gate of the court, the cords of it, and the pegs of it, and all the instruments of the service of the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting,
the finely wrought garments for ministering in the holy place, and the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to minister in the priest's office.
According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so the sons of Israel did all the work.
And Moses saw all the work, and, behold, they had done it, as Jehovah had commanded, even so they had done it. And Moses blessed them.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
On the first day of the first month thou shall raise up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.
And thou shall put the ark of the testimony in it, and thou shall screen the ark with the veil.
And thou shall bring in the table, and set in order the things that are upon it, and thou shall bring in the lampstand, and light the lamps of it.
And thou shall set the golden altar for incense before the ark of the testimony, and put the screen of the door to the tabernacle.
And thou shall set the altar of burnt offering before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.
And thou shall set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and shall put water in it.
And thou shall set up the court round about, and hang up the screen of the gate of the court.
And thou shall take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is in it, and shall hallow it, and all the furniture of it. And it shall be holy.
And thou shall anoint the altar of burnt offering, and all its vessels, and sanctify the altar. And the altar shall be most holy.
And thou shall anoint the laver and its base, and sanctify it.
And thou shall bring Aaron and his sons to the door of the tent of meeting, and shall wash them with water.
And thou shall put upon Aaron the holy garments, and thou shall anoint him, and sanctify him, that he may minister to me in the priest's office.
And thou shall bring his sons, and put tunics upon them,
and thou shall anoint them, as thou anointed their father, that they may minister to me in the priest's office. And their anointing shall be to them for an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.
Thus did Moses. According to all that Jehovah commanded him, so did he.
And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was raised up.
And Moses raised up the tabernacle, and laid its sockets, and set up the boards of it, and put in the bars of it, and raised up its pillars.
And he spread the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above upon it, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and set the staves on the ark, and put the mercy-seat above upon the ark.
And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and set up the veil of the screen, and screened the ark of the testimony, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he put the table in the tent of meeting, upon the side of the tabernacle northward, outside the veil.
And he set the bread in order upon it before Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he put the lampstand in the tent of meeting, opposite the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.
And he lit the lamps before Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he put the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the veil,
and he burnt incense of sweet spices on it, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he put the screen of the door to the tabernacle.
And he set the altar of burnt offering at the door of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meal offering, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and put water in it, with which to wash.
And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet there.
They washed when they went into the tent of meeting, and when they came near to the altar, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he raised up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and set up the screen of the gate of the court. So Moses finished the work.
Then the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle.
And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of meeting, because the cloud abode thereupon, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle.
And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the sons of Israel went onward, throughout all their journeys,
but if the cloud was not taken up, then they did not journey till the day that it was taken up.
For the cloud of Jehovah was upon the tabernacle by day, and there was fire therein by night, in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.

Leviticus

And Jehovah called to Moses, and spoke to him out of the tent of meeting, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When any man of you offers an oblation to Jehovah, ye shall offer your oblation of the cattle, even of the herd and of the flock.
If his oblation be a burnt offering of the herd, he shall offer it a male without blemish. He shall offer it at the door of the tent of meeting, that he may be accepted before Jehovah.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the burnt offering, and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him.
And he shall kill the bullock before Jehovah, and Aaron's sons, the priests, shall present the blood, and sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar that is at the door of the tent of meeting.
And he shall skin the burnt offering, and cut it into its pieces.
And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar, and lay wood in order upon the fire.
And Aaron's sons, the priests, shall lay the pieces, the head, and the fat, in order upon the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar,
but its innards and its legs he shall wash with water. And the priest shall burn the whole on the altar, for a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And if his oblation be of the flock, of the sheep, or of the goats, for a burnt offering, he shall offer it a male without blemish.
And he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before Jehovah, and Aaron's sons, the priests, shall sprinkle its blood upon the altar round about.
And he shall cut it into its pieces, with its head and its fat, and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar,
but the innards and the legs he shall wash with water. And the priest shall offer the whole, and burn it upon the altar. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And if his oblation to Jehovah be a burnt offering of birds, then he shall offer his oblation of turtle-doves, or of young pigeons.
And the priest shall bring it to the altar, and wring off its head, and burn it on the altar. And the blood of it shall be drained out on the side of the altar.
And he shall take away its crop with the filth of it, and cast it beside the altar on the east part, in the place of the ashes.
And he shall rend it by the wings of it, but shall not divide it apart, and the priest shall burn it upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon the fire. It is a burnt offering, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.

And when anyone offers an oblation of a meal offering to Jehovah, his oblation shall be of fine flour, and he shall pour oil upon it, and put frankincense on it.
And he shall bring it to Aaron's sons the priests, and he shall take out of it his handful of the fine flour of it, and of the oil of it, with all the frankincense of it. And the priest shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And that which is left of the meal offering shall be Aaron's and his sons'. It is a thing most holy of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire.
And when thou offer an oblation of a meal offering baked in the oven, it shall be unleavened cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, or unleavened wafers anointed with oil.
And if thy oblation be a meal offering of the baking-pan, it shall be of fine flour unleavened, mingled with oil.
Thou shall part it in pieces, and pour oil in it. It is a meal offering.
And if thy oblation be a meal offering of the frying-pan, it shall be made of fine flour with oil.
And thou shall bring the meal offering that is made of these things to Jehovah, and it shall be presented to the priest, and he shall bring it to the altar.
And the priest shall take up from the meal offering the memorial of it, and shall burn it upon the altar, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And that which is left of the meal offering shall be Aaron's and his sons'. It is a thing most holy of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire.
No meal offering, which ye shall offer to Jehovah, shall be made with leaven, for ye shall burn no leaven, nor any honey, as an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
As an oblation of first-fruits ye shall offer them to Jehovah, but they shall not come up for a sweet savor on the altar.
And every oblation of thy meal offering thou shall season with salt, nor shall thou allow the salt of the covenant of thy God to be lacking from thy meal offering. With all thine oblations thou shall offer salt.
And if thou offer a meal offering of first-fruits to Jehovah, thou shall offer for the meal offering of thy first-fruits grain in the ear parched with fire, crushed grain of the fresh ear.
And thou shall put oil upon it, and lay frankincense on it. It is a meal offering.
And the priest shall burn the memorial of it, part of the crushed grain of it, and part of the oil of it, with all the frankincense of it. It is an offering made by fire to Jehovah.

And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offerings, if he offer of the herd, whether male or female, he shall offer it without blemish before Jehovah.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his oblation, and kill it at the door of the tent of meeting. And Aaron's sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
And he shall offer of the sacrifice of peace offerings an offering made by fire to Jehovah, he shall take away the fat that covers the innards, and all the fat that is upon the innards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the loins, and the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys.
And Aaron's sons shall burn it on the altar upon the burnt offering, which is upon the wood that is on the fire. It is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And if his oblation for a sacrifice of peace offerings to Jehovah be of the flock, male or female, he shall offer it without blemish.
If he offers a lamb for his oblation, then he shall offer it before Jehovah.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his oblation, and kill it before the tent of meeting. And Aaron's sons shall sprinkle the blood of it upon the altar round about.
And he shall offer of the sacrifice of peace offerings an offering made by fire to Jehovah. The fat of it, the entire fat tail, he shall take away close by the backbone. And he shall take away the fat that covers the innards, and all the fat that is upon the innards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the loins, and the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys.
And the priest shall burn it upon the altar. It is the food of the offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And if his oblation be a goat, then he shall offer it before Jehovah.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of it, and kill it before the tent of meeting. And the sons of Aaron shall sprinkle the blood of it upon the altar round about.
And he shall offer his oblation from it, even an offering made by fire to Jehovah. He shall take away the fat that covers the innards, and all the fat that is upon the innards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the loins, and the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys.
And the priest shall burn them upon the altar. It is the food of the offering made by fire, for a sweet savor. All the fat is Jehovah's.
It shall be a perpetual statute throughout your generations in all your dwellings, that ye shall eat neither fat nor blood.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If a soul shall sin unwittingly, in any of the things which Jehovah has commanded not to be done, and shall do any one of them,
if the anointed priest shall sin so as to bring guilt on the people, then let him offer for his sin, which he has sinned, a young bullock without blemish to Jehovah for a sin offering.
And he shall bring the bullock to the door of the tent of meeting before Jehovah. And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the bullock, and kill the bullock before Jehovah.
And the anointed priest shall take of the blood of the bullock, and bring it to the tent of meeting.
And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle of the blood seven times before Jehovah, before the veil of the sanctuary.
And the priest shall put of the blood upon the horns of the altar of sweet incense before Jehovah, which is in the tent of meeting, and all the blood of the bullock he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the door of the tent of meeting.
And all the fat of the bullock of the sin offering he shall take off from it. The fat that covers the innards, and all the fat that is upon the innards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, which is by the loins, and the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys, he shall take away,
as it is taken off from the ox of the sacrifice of peace offerings. And the priest shall burn them upon the altar of burnt offering.
And the skin of the bullock, and all its flesh, with its head, and with its legs, and its innards, and its dung,
even the whole bullock he shall carry forth outside the camp to a clean place, where the ashes are poured out, and burn it on wood with fire. It shall be burnt where the ashes are poured out.
And if the whole congregation of Israel err, and the thing be hid from the eyes of the assembly, and they have done any of the things which Jehovah has commanded not to be done, and are guilty,
when the sin by which they have sinned is known, then the assembly shall offer a young bullock for a sin offering, and bring it before the tent of meeting.
And the elders of the congregation shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock before Jehovah, and the bullock shall be killed before Jehovah.
And the anointed priest shall bring of the blood of the bullock to the tent of meeting.
And the priest shall dip his finger in the blood, and sprinkle it seven times before Jehovah, before the veil.
And he shall put of the blood upon the horns of the altar which is before Jehovah, that is in the tent of meeting, and all the blood he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering, which is at the door of the tent of meeting.
And all the fat of it he shall take off from it, and burn it upon the altar.
Thus he shall do with the bullock, as he did with the bullock of the sin offering, so he shall do with this. And the priest shall make atonement for them, and they shall be forgiven.
And he shall carry forth the bullock outside the camp, and burn it as he burned the first bullock. It is the sin offering for the assembly.
When a ruler sins, and does unwittingly any one of all the things which Jehovah his God has commanded not to be done, and is guilty,
if his sin, by which he has sinned, be made known to him, he shall bring for his oblation a goat, a male without blemish.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the goat, and kill it in the place where they kill the burnt offering before Jehovah. It is a sin offering.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and the blood of it he shall pour out at the base of the altar of burnt offering.
And all the fat of it he shall burn upon the altar, as the fat of the sacrifice of peace offerings. And the priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin, and he shall be forgiven.
And if any soul of the common people sin unwittingly, in doing any of the things which Jehovah has commanded not to be done, and be guilty,
if his sin, which he has sinned, be made known to him, then he shall bring for his oblation a goat, a female without blemish, for his sin which he has sinned.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and kill the sin offering in the place of burnt offering.
And the priest shall take of the blood of it with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and all the blood of it he shall pour out at the base of the altar.
And all the fat of it he shall take away, as the fat is taken away from off the sacrifice of peace offerings, and the priest shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savor to Jehovah. And the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be forgiven.
And if he brings a lamb as his oblation for a sin offering, he shall bring it a female without blemish.
And he shall lay his hand upon the head of the sin offering, and kill it for a sin offering in the place where they kill the burnt offering.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering with his finger, and put it upon the horns of the altar of burnt offering, and all the blood of it he shall pour out at the base of the altar.
And all the fat of it he shall take away, as the fat of the lamb is taken away from the sacrifice of peace offerings, and the priest shall burn them on the altar, upon the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. And the priest shall make atonement for him concerning his sin that he has sinned, and he shall be forgiven.

And if a soul sins, in that he hears the voice of an oath, he being a witness, whether he has seen or known, if he does not testify, then he shall bear his iniquity.
Or if a soul touches any unclean thing, whether it be the carcass of an unclean beast, or the carcass of unclean cattle, or the carcass of unclean creeping things, and it be hidden from him, and he be unclean, then he shall be guilty.
Or if he touch the uncleanness of man, whatever his uncleanness be with which he is unclean, and it be hid from him, when he knows of it, then he shall be guilty.
Or if a soul swears rashly with his lips to do evil, or to do good, whatever it be that a man shall utter rashly with an oath, and it be hid from him, when he realizes it, then he shall be guilty in one of these.
And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these, that he shall confess that by which he has sinned.
And he shall bring his trespass offering to Jehovah for his sin which he has sinned, a female from the flock, a lamb or a goat, for a sin offering. And the priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin.
And if his means is not sufficient for a lamb, then he shall bring his trespass offering for that by which he has sinned, two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, to Jehovah, one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering.
And he shall bring them to the priest, who shall offer that which is for the sin offering first, and wring off its head from its neck, but shall not divide it apart.
And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering upon the side of the altar, and the rest of the blood shall be drained out at the base of the altar. It is a sin offering.
And he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to the ordinance. And the priest shall make atonement for him as concerning his sin which he has sinned, and he shall be forgiven.
But if his means is not sufficient for two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, then he shall bring his oblation for that by which he has sinned, the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering. He shall put no oil upon it, nor shall he put any frankincense on it, for it is a sin offering.
And he shall bring it to the priest, and the priest shall take his handful of it as the memorial of it, and burn it on the altar, upon the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. It is a sin offering.
And the priest shall make atonement for him concerning his sin that he has sinned in any of these things, and he shall be forgiven. And the remnant shall be the priest's, as the meal offering.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
If a soul commits a trespass, and sins unwittingly in the holy things of Jehovah, then he shall bring his trespass offering to Jehovah, a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to thy estimation in silver by shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, for a trespass offering.
And he shall make restitution for that which he has done amiss in the holy thing, and shall add the fifth part to it, and give it to the priest. And the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering, and he shall be forgiven.
And if a soul sins, and does any of the things which Jehovah has commanded not to be done, though he did not know it, yet he is guilty, and shall bear his iniquity.
And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to thy estimation, for a trespass offering, to the priest. And the priest shall make atonement for him concerning the thing by which he erred unwittingly and knew it not, and he shall be forgiven.
It is a trespass offering. He is certainly guilty before Jehovah.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
If a soul sins, and commits a trespass against Jehovah, and deals falsely with his neighbor in a matter of deposit, or of bargain, or of robbery, or have oppressed his neighbor,
or has found that which was lost, and deal falsely by it, and swears to a lie, in any of all these things that a man does, sinning by it,
then it shall be, if he has sinned, and is guilty, that he shall restore that which he took by robbery, or the thing which he has gotten by oppression, or the deposit which was committed to him, or the lost thing which he found,
or anything about which he has sworn falsely, he shall even restore it in full, and shall add the fifth part more to it. He shall give it to him to whom it pertains, in the day of his being found guilty.
And he shall bring his trespass offering to Jehovah, a ram without blemish out of the flock, according to thy estimation, for a trespass offering, to the priest.
And the priest shall make atonement for him before Jehovah, and he shall be forgiven concerning whatever he does so as to be guilty by it.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
The burnt offering shall be on the hearth upon the altar all night to the morning, and the fire of the altar shall be kept burning on it.
And the priest shall put on his linen garment, and he shall put his linen breeches upon his flesh, and he shall take up the ashes of the fire which has consumed the burnt offering on the altar, and he shall put them beside the altar.
And he shall put off his garments, and put on other garments, and carry forth the ashes outside the camp to a clean place.
And the fire upon the altar shall be kept burning on it; it shall not go out. And the priest shall burn wood on it every morning, and he shall lay the burnt offering in order upon it, and shall burn the fat of the peace offerings on it.
Fire shall be kept burning upon the altar continually; it shall not go out.
The sons of Aaron shall offer it before Jehovah, before the altar.
And he shall take up his handful from it, of the fine flour of the meal offering, and of the oil of it, and all the frankincense which is upon the meal offering, and shall burn it upon the altar for a sweet savor, as the memorial of it, to Jehovah.
And that which is left of it Aaron and his sons shall eat. It shall be eaten without leaven in a holy place. They shall eat it in the court of the tent of meeting.
It shall not be baked with leaven. I have given it as their portion of my offerings made by fire, it is most holy, as the sin offering, and as the trespass offering.
Every male among the sons of Aaron shall eat of it, as a portion forever throughout your generations, from the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. Whoever touches them shall be holy.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering perpetually, half of it in the morning, and half of it in the evening.
It shall be made with oil on a baking-pan. Thou shall bring it in when it is soaked. Thou shall offer the meal offering in baked pieces for a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And the anointed priest who shall be in his stead from among his sons shall offer it. It shall be wholly burnt to Jehovah by a statute forever.
And every meal offering of the priest shall be wholly burnt; it shall not be eaten.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
In the place where the burnt offering is killed the sin offering shall be killed before Jehovah. It is most holy.
The priest who offers it for sin shall eat it. It shall be eaten in a holy place, in the court of the tent of meeting.
Whatever shall touch the flesh of it shall be holy. And when there is of the blood sprinkled upon any garment, thou shall wash that on which it was sprinkled in a holy place.
But the earthen vessel in which it is boiled shall be broken, and if it be boiled in a brazen vessel, it shall be scoured, and rinsed in water.
Every male among the priests shall eat of it. It is most holy.
And no sin offering, from which any of the blood is brought into the tent of meeting to make atonement in the holy place, shall be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire.

And this is the law of the trespass offering. It is most holy.
In the place where they kill the burnt offering they shall kill the trespass offering, and the blood of it he shall sprinkle upon the altar round about.
And he shall offer from it all the fat of it. He shall take away the fat tail, and the fat that covers the innards,
and the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the loins, and the caul upon the liver, with the kidneys.
And the priest shall burn them upon the altar for an offering made by fire to Jehovah. It is a trespass offering.
Every male among the priests shall eat of it. It shall be eaten in a holy place; it is most holy.
As is the sin offering, so is the trespass offering, there is one law for them. The priest who makes atonement with it, he shall have it.
And the priest who offers any man's burnt offering, even the priest shall have to himself the skin of the burnt offering which he has offered.
And every meal offering that is baked in the oven, and all that is dressed in the frying-pan, and on the baking-pan, shall be the priest's who offers it.
And every meal offering, mingled with oil, or dry, all the sons of Aaron shall have, one as well as another.
And this is the law of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he shall offer to Jehovah.
If he offers it for a thanksgiving, then he shall offer with the sacrifice of thanksgiving unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and cakes mingled with oil, of fine flour soaked.
He shall offer his oblation with the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving with cakes of leavened bread.
And from it he shall offer one out of each oblation for a heave offering to Jehovah. It shall be the priest's who sprinkles the blood of the peace offerings.
And the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings for thanksgiving shall be eaten on the day of his oblation; he shall not leave any of it until the morning.
But if the sacrifice of his oblation be a vow, or a freewill offering, it shall be eaten on the day that he offers his sacrifice, and on the morrow that which remains of it shall be eaten,
but that which remains of the flesh of the sacrifice on the third day shall be burnt with fire.
And if any of the flesh of the sacrifice of his peace offerings is eaten on the third day, it shall not be accepted, nor shall it be imputed to him who offers it. It shall be an abomination, and the soul that eats of it shall bear his iniquity.
And the flesh that touches any unclean thing shall not be eaten; it shall be burnt with fire. And as for the flesh, every clean man shall eat of it,
but the soul that eats of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, that pertain to Jehovah, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
And when a soul shall touch any unclean thing, the uncleanness of man, or an unclean beast, or any unclean abomination, and eats of the flesh of the sacrifice of peace offerings, which pertain to Jehovah, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Ye shall eat no fat, of ox, or sheep, or goat.
And the fat of that which dies of itself, and the fat of that which is torn of beasts, may be used for any other service, but ye shall certainly not eat of it.
For whoever eats the fat of the beast, of which men offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah, even the soul that eats it shall be cut off from his people.
And ye shall eat no manner of blood, whether it be of bird or of beast, in any of your dwellings.
Whoever it is who eats any blood, that soul shall be cut off from his people.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, He who offers the sacrifice of his peace offerings to Jehovah shall bring his oblation to Jehovah out of the sacrifice of his peace offerings.
His own hands shall bring the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. He shall bring the fat with the breast, that the breast may be waved for a wave offering before Jehovah.
And the priest shall burn the fat upon the altar, but the breast shall be Aaron's and his sons'.
And the right thigh ye shall give to the priest for a heave offering out of the sacrifices of your peace offerings.
He among the sons of Aaron who offers the blood of the peace offerings, and the fat, shall have the right thigh for a portion.
For I have taken the wave-breast and the heave-thigh from the sons of Israel out of the sacrifices of their peace offerings, and have given them to Aaron the priest and to his sons as a portion forever from the sons of Israel.
This is the anointing-portion of Aaron, and the anointing-portion of his sons, out of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire, in the day when he presented them to minister to Jehovah in the priest's office,
which Jehovah commanded to be given them from the sons of Israel, in the day that he anointed them. It is a portion forever throughout their generations.
This is the law of the burnt offering, of the meal offering, and of the sin offering, and of the trespass offering, and of the consecration, and of the sacrifice of peace offerings,
which Jehovah commanded Moses at mount Sinai, in the day that he commanded the sons of Israel to offer their oblations to Jehovah, in the wilderness of Sinai.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take Aaron and his sons with him, and the garments, and the anointing oil, and the bullock of the sin offering, and the two rams, and the basket of unleavened bread,
and assemble thou all the congregation at the door of the tent of meeting.
And Moses did as Jehovah commanded him, and the congregation was assembled at the door of the tent of meeting.
And Moses said to the congregation, This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded to be done.
And Moses brought Aaron and his sons, and washed them with water.
And he put upon him the tunic, and girded him with the sash, and clothed him with the robe, and put the ephod upon him, and he girded him with the skillfully woven band of the ephod, and bound it to him therewith.
And he placed the breastplate upon him, and he put the Urim and the Thummim in the breastplate.
And he set the miter upon his head. And upon the miter, in front, he set the golden plate, the holy crown, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And Moses took the anointing oil, and anointed the tabernacle and all that was in it, and sanctified them.
And he sprinkled of it upon the altar seven times, and anointed the altar and all its vessels, and the laver and its base, to sanctify them.
And he poured of the anointing oil upon Aaron's head, and anointed him, to sanctify him.
And Moses brought Aaron's sons, and clothed them with tunics, and girded them with sashes, and bound head-coverings upon them, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he brought the bullock of the sin offering. And Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the bullock of the sin offering,
and he killed it. And Moses took the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about with his finger, and purified the altar, and poured out the blood at the base of the altar, and sanctified it, to make atonement for it.
And he took all the fat that was upon the innards, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and Moses burned it upon the altar.
But the bullock, and its skin, and its flesh, and its dung, he burnt with fire outside the camp, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he presented the ram of the burnt offering. And Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram,
and he killed it. And Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
And he cut the ram into its pieces, and Moses burnt the head, and the pieces, and the fat.
And he washed the innards and the legs with water. And Moses burnt the whole ram upon the altar. It was a burnt offering for a sweet savor. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he presented the other ram, the ram of consecration. And Aaron and his sons laid their hands upon the head of the ram,
and he killed it. And Moses took of the blood of it, and put it upon the tip of Aaron's right ear, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.
And he brought Aaron's sons, and Moses put of the blood upon the tip of their right ear, and upon the thumb of their right hand, and upon the great toe of their right foot. And Moses sprinkled the blood upon the altar round about.
And he took the fat, and the fat tail, and all the fat that was upon the innards, and the caul of the liver, and the two kidneys, and their fat, and the right thigh,
and out of the basket of unleavened bread, that was before Jehovah, he took one unleavened cake, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer, and placed them on the fat, and upon the right thigh.
And he put the whole upon the hands of Aaron, and upon the hands of his sons, and waved them for a wave offering before Jehovah.
And Moses took them from off their hands, and burnt them on the altar upon the burnt offering. They were a consecration for a sweet savor. It was an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And Moses took the breast, and waved it for a wave offering before Jehovah. It was Moses' portion of the ram of consecration, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And Moses took of the anointing oil, and of the blood which was upon the altar, and sprinkled it upon Aaron, upon his garments, and upon his sons, and upon his sons' garments with him, and sanctified Aaron, his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him.
And Moses said to Aaron and to his sons, Boil the flesh at the door of the tent of meeting, and there eat it and the bread that is in the basket of consecration, as I commanded, saying, Aaron and his sons shall eat it.
And that which remains of the flesh and of the bread ye shall burn with fire.
And ye shall not go out from the door of the tent of meeting seven days, until the days of your consecration be fulfilled, for he shall consecrate you seven days.
As has been done this day, so Jehovah has commanded to do, to make atonement for you.
And ye shall remain at the door of the tent of meeting day and night seven days, and keep the charge of Jehovah, that ye not die, for so I am commanded.
And Aaron and his sons did all the things which Jehovah commanded by Moses.

And it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and his sons, and the elders of Israel,
and he said to Aaron, Take thee a calf of the herd for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering, without blemish, and offer them before Jehovah.
And thou shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Take ye a he-goat for a sin offering, and a calf and a lamb, both a year old, without blemish, for a burnt offering,
and an ox and a ram for peace offerings, to sacrifice before Jehovah, and a meal offering mingled with oil. For today Jehovah appears to you.
And they brought that which Moses commanded before the tent of meeting, and all the congregation drew near and stood before Jehovah.
And Moses said, This is the thing which Jehovah commanded that ye should do, and the glory of Jehovah shall appear to you.
And Moses said to Aaron, Draw near to the altar, and offer thy sin offering, and thy burnt offering, and make atonement for thyself, and for the people. And offer the oblation of the people, and make atonement for them, as Jehovah commanded.
So Aaron drew near to the altar, and killed the calf of the sin offering, which was for himself.
And the sons of Aaron presented the blood to him, and he dipped his finger in the blood, and put it upon the horns of the altar, and poured out the blood at the base of the altar,
but he burnt the fat, and the kidneys, and the caul from the liver of the sin offering, upon the altar, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And he burnt the flesh and the skin with fire outside the camp.
And he killed the burnt offering. And Aaron's sons delivered to him the blood, and he sprinkled it upon the altar round about.
And they delivered the burnt offering to him, piece by piece, and the head, and he burnt them upon the altar.
And he washed the innards and the legs, and burnt them upon the burnt offering on the altar.
And he presented the people's oblation. And took the goat of the sin offering which was for the people, and killed it, and offered it for sin, as the first.
And he presented the burnt offering, and offered it according to the ordinance.
And he presented the meal offering, and filled his hand from it, and burnt it upon the altar, besides the burnt offering of the morning.
He also killed the ox and the ram, the sacrifice of peace offerings, which was for the people. And Aaron's sons delivered to him the blood, which he sprinkled upon the altar round about,
and the fat of the ox and of the ram, the fat tail, and that which covers the innards, and the kidneys, and the caul of the liver.
And they put the fat upon the breasts, and he burnt the fat upon the altar.
And the breasts and the right thigh Aaron waved for a wave offering before Jehovah, as Moses commanded.
And Aaron lifted up his hands toward the people, and blessed them. And he came down from offering the sin offering, and the burnt offering, and the peace offerings.
And Moses and Aaron went into the tent of meeting, and came out, and blessed the people. And the glory of Jehovah appeared to all the people.
And there came forth fire from before Jehovah, and consumed the burnt offering and the fat upon the altar. And when all the people saw it, they shouted, and fell on their faces.

And Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, each of them took his censer, and put fire in it, and laid incense on it, and offered strange fire before Jehovah, which he had not commanded them.
And there came forth fire from before Jehovah, and devoured them, and they died before Jehovah.
Then Moses said to Aaron, This is it that Jehovah spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in those who come near me. And I will be glorified before all the people. And Aaron remained silent.
And Moses called Mishael and Elzaphan, the sons of Uzziel the uncle of Aaron, and said to them, Draw near. Carry your brothers from before the sanctuary out of the camp.
So they drew near, and carried them in their tunics out of the camp, as Moses had said.
And Moses said to Aaron, and to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons, Let not the hair of your heads go loose, neither tear your clothes, that ye not die, and that he not be angry with all the congregation, but let your brothers, the whole house of Israel, bewail the burning which Jehovah has kindled.
And ye shall not go out from the door of the tent of meeting, lest ye die, for the anointing oil of Jehovah is upon you. And they did according to the word of Moses.
And Jehovah spoke to Aaron, saying,
Drink no wine nor strong drink, thou, nor thy sons with thee, when ye go into the tent of meeting, that ye not die-it shall be a statute forever throughout your generations-
and that ye may make a distinction between the holy and the common, and between the unclean and the clean,
and that ye may teach the sons of Israel all the statutes which Jehovah has spoken to them by Moses.
And Moses spoke to Aaron, and to Eleazar and to Ithamar, his sons who were left, Take the meal offering that remains of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire, and eat it without leaven beside the altar, for it is most holy.
And ye shall eat it in a holy place, because it is thy portion, and thy sons' portion, of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire. For so I am commanded.
And ye shall eat the wave-breast and the heave-thigh in a clean place, thou, and thy sons, and thy daughters with thee. For they are given as thy portion, and thy sons' portion, out of the sacrifices of the peace offerings of the sons of Israel.
They shall bring the heave-thigh and the wave-breast with the offerings made by fire of the fat, to wave it for a wave offering before Jehovah, and it shall be thine, and thy sons' with thee, as a portion forever, as Jehovah has commanded.
And Moses diligently sought the goat of the sin offering, and, behold, it was burnt. And he was angry with Eleazar and with Ithamar, the sons of Aaron who were left, saying,
Why have ye not eaten the sin offering in the place of the sanctuary, seeing it is most holy, and he has given it to you to bear the iniquity of the congregation, to make atonement for them before Jehovah?
Behold, the blood of it was not brought into the sanctuary inside. Ye should certainly have eaten it in the sanctuary, as I commanded.
And Aaron spoke to Moses, Behold, this day they have offered their sin offering and their burnt offering before Jehovah, and there have befallen me such things as these. And if I had eaten the sin offering today, would it have been well-pleasing in the sight of Jehovah?
And when Moses heard, it was well-pleasing in his sight.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying to them,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, These are the living things which ye may eat among all the beasts that are on the earth.
Whatever parts the hoof, and is cloven footed, and chews the cud, among the beasts, that may ye eat.
the camel, because he chews the cud but does not part the hoof, he is unclean to you.
And the coney, because he chews the cud but does not part the hoof, he is unclean to you.
And the hare, because she chews the cud but does not part the hoof, she is unclean to you.
And the swine, because he parts the hoof, and is cloven footed, but does not chew the cud, he is unclean to you.
Of their flesh ye shall not eat, and their carcasses ye shall not touch, they are unclean to you.
whatever has fins and scales in the waters, in the seas, and in the rivers, that may ye eat.
And all that have no fins and scales in the seas, and in the rivers, of all that move in the waters, and of all the living creatures that are in the waters, they are an abomination to you,
and they shall be an abomination to you. Ye shall not eat of their flesh, and their carcasses ye shall have in abomination.
Whatever has no fins nor scales in the waters, that is an abomination to you.
the eagle, and the vulture, and the osprey,
and the kite, and the falcon after its kind,
every raven after its kind,
and the ostrich, and the night-hawk, and the sea-gull, and the hawk after its kind,
and the little owl, and the cormorant, and the great owl,
and the horned owl, and the pelican, and the carrion vulture,
and the stork, the heron after its kind, and the hoopoe, and the bat.
All winged creeping things that go upon all fours are an abomination to you.
Yet these ye may eat of all winged creeping things that go upon all fours, which have legs above their feet, with which to leap upon the earth,
the locust after its kind, and the bald locust after its kind, and the cricket after its kind, and the grasshopper after its kind.
But all winged creeping things, which have four feet, are an abomination to you,
and by these ye shall become unclean. Whoever touches the carcass of them shall be unclean until the evening.
And whoever bears any of the carcass of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening.
Every beast which parts the hoof, and is not cloven footed, nor chews the cud, is unclean to you. Everyone who touches them shall be unclean.
And whatever goes upon its paws, among all beasts that go on all fours, they are unclean to you. Whoever touches their carcass shall be unclean until the evening.
And he who bears the carcass of them shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening; they are unclean to you.
the weasel, and the mouse, and the great lizard after its kind,
and the gecko, and the land-crocodile, and the lizard, and the sand-lizard, and the chameleon.
These are those which are unclean to you among all that creep. Whoever touches them, when they are dead, shall be unclean until the evening.
And upon whatever any of them falls when they are dead, it shall be unclean, whether it be any vessel of wood, or raiment, or skin, or sack. Whatever vessel it be, with which any work is done, it must be put into water, and it shall be unclean until the evening, then it shall be clean.
And every earthen vessel, into which any of them falls, whatever is in it shall be unclean, and ye shall break it.
All food therein which may be eaten, that on which water comes, shall be unclean, and all drink that may be drunk in every such vessel shall be unclean.
And everything upon which any part of their carcass falls shall be unclean, whether oven, or range for pots, it shall be broken in pieces; they are unclean, and shall be unclean to you.
Nevertheless a fountain or a pit in which is a gathering of water shall be clean, but that which touches their carcass shall be unclean.
And if any of their carcass falls upon any sowing seed which is to be sown, it is clean.
But if water is put upon the seed, and any of their carcass falls in it, it is unclean to you.
And if any beast, of which ye may eat, dies, he who touches the carcass of it shall be unclean until the evening.
And he who eats of the carcass of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening. He also who bears the carcass of it shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening.
And every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth is an abomination; it shall not be eaten.
Whatever goes upon the belly, and whatever goes upon all fours, or whatever has many feet, even all creeping things that creep upon the earth, them ye shall not eat, for they are an abomination.
Ye shall not make yourselves abominable with any creeping thing that creeps, nor shall ye make yourselves unclean with them, that ye should be defiled by it.
For I am Jehovah your God. Sanctify yourselves therefore, and become ye holy, since I am holy. Neither shall ye defile yourselves with any manner of creeping thing that moves upon the earth.
For I am Jehovah who brought you up out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. Ye shall therefore be holy, for I am holy.
This is the law of the beast, and of the bird, and of every living creature that moves in the waters, and of every creature that creeps upon the earth,
to make a distinction between the unclean and the clean, and between the living thing that may be eaten and the living thing that may not be eaten.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If a woman conceives seed, and bears a man-child, then she shall be unclean seven days, as in the days of the impurity of her sickness she shall be unclean.
And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised.
And she shall continue in the blood of her purifying thirty-three days. She shall touch no hallowed thing, nor come into the sanctuary, until the days of her purifying be fulfilled.
But if she bears a maid-child, then she shall be unclean two weeks, as in her impurity, and she shall continue in the blood of her purifying sixty-six days.
And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a daughter, she shall bring a lamb a year old for a burnt offering, and a young pigeon, or a turtle-dove, for a sin offering, to the door of the tent of meeting, to the priest.
And he shall offer it before Jehovah, and make atonement for her, and she shall be cleansed from the fountain of her blood. This is the law for her who bears, whether a male or a female.
And if her means are not sufficient for a lamb, then she shall take two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, the one for a burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering. And the priest shall make atonement for her, and she shall be clean.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
When a man shall have in the skin of his flesh a rising, or a scab, or a bright spot, and it becomes in the skin of his flesh a leprous disease, then he shall be brought to Aaron the priest, or to one of his sons the priests.
And the priest shall look on the disease in the skin of the flesh, and if the hair in the disease has turned white, and the appearance of the disease is deeper than the skin of his flesh, it is a leprous disease. And the priest shall look on him, and pronounce him unclean.
And if the bright spot is white in the skin of his flesh, and the appearance of it is not deeper than the skin, and the hair of it has not turned white, then the priest shall shut up the disease seven days.
And the priest shall look on him the seventh day, and, behold, if in his eyes the disease is arrested, and the disease is not spread in the skin, then the priest shall shut him up seven days more.
And the priest shall look on him again the seventh day, and, behold, if the disease is dim, and the disease has not spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean. It is a scab, and he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
But if the scab spreads abroad in the skin after he has shown himself to the priest for his cleansing, he shall show himself to the priest again.
And the priest shall look, and, behold, if the scab is spread in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is a leprous disease.
When the leprous disease is in a man, then he shall be brought to the priest.
And the priest shall look, and, behold, if there is a white rising in the skin, and it has turned the hair white, and there is quick raw flesh in the rising,
it is an old leprous disease in the skin of his flesh, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean. He shall not shut him up, for he is unclean.
And if the leprous disease breaks out abroad in the skin, and the leprous disease covers all the skin of the disease from his head even to his feet, as far as appears to the priest,
then the priest shall look. And, behold, if the leprous disease has covered all his flesh, he shall pronounce him clean of the disease. It is all turned white; he is clean.
But whenever raw flesh appears in him, he shall be unclean.
And the priest shall look on the raw flesh, and pronounce him unclean. The raw flesh is unclean; it is a leprous disease.
Or if the raw flesh turns again, and is changed to white, then he shall come to the priest.
And the priest shall look on him, and, behold, if the disease is turned into white, then the priest shall pronounce him clean of the disease; he is clean.
And when the flesh has a boil in the skin of it, and it is healed,
and in the place of the boil there is a white rising, or a bright spot, reddish-white, then it shall be shown to the priest.
And the priest shall look, and, behold, if the appearance of it is deeper than the skin, and the hair of it has turned white, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean. It is a leprous disease; it has broken out in the boil.
But if the priest looks on it, and, behold, there are no white hairs in it, and it is not deeper than the skin, but is dim, then the priest shall shut him up seven days.
And if it spreads abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a disease.
But if the bright spot stays in its place, and has not spread, it is the scar of the boil, and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
Or when the flesh has a burning by fire in the skin of it, and the quick of the burning become a bright spot, reddish-white, or white,
then the priest shall look upon it. And, behold, if the hair in the bright spot has turned white, and the appearance of it is deeper than the skin, it is a leprous disease. It has broken out in the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a leprous disease.
But if the priest looks on it, and, behold, there is no white hair in the bright spot, and it is no deeper than the skin, but is dim, then the priest shall shut him up seven days.
And the priest shall look upon him the seventh day. If it spread abroad in the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a leprous disease.
And if the bright spot stays in its place, and has not spread in the skin, but is dim, it is the rising of the burning, and the priest shall pronounce him clean, for it is the scar of the burning.
And when a man or woman has a disease upon the head or upon the beard,
then the priest shall look on the disease. And, behold, if the appearance of it is deeper than the skin, and there is yellow thin hair in it, then the priest shall pronounce him unclean; it is a scall. It is a leprous disease of the head or of the beard.
And if the priest looks on the disease of the scall, and, behold, the appearance of it is not deeper than the skin, and there is no black hair in it, then the priest shall shut up the disease of the scall seven days.
And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the disease, and, behold, if the scall has not spread, and there is in it no yellow hair, and the appearance of the scall is not deeper than the skin,
then he shall be shaven, but the scall he shall not shave, and the priest shall shut up him who has the scall seven days more.
And in the seventh day the priest shall look on the scall, and, behold, if the scall has not spread in the skin, and the appearance of it is not deeper than the skin, then the priest shall pronounce him clean. And he shall wash his clothes, and be clean.
But if the scall spreads abroad in the skin after his cleansing,
then the priest shall look on him. And, behold, if the scall has spread in the skin, the priest shall not seek for the yellow hair, he is unclean.
But if in his eyes the scall is arrested, and black hair is grown up in it, the scall is healed. He is clean, and the priest shall pronounce him clean.
And when a man or a woman has bright spots in the skin of the flesh, even white bright spots,
then the priest shall look. And, behold, if the bright spots in the skin of their flesh are of a dull white, it is a tetter. It has broken out in the skin; he is clean.
And if a man's hair is fallen off his head, he is bald; he is clean.
And if his hair is fallen off from the front part of his head, he is forehead bald; he is clean.
But if there is a reddish-white disease in the bald head, or the bald forehead, it is a leprous disease breaking out in his bald head, or his bald forehead.
Then the priest shall look upon him, and, behold, if the rising of the disease is reddish-white in his bald head, or in his bald forehead, as the appearance of a leprous disease in the skin of the flesh,
he is a leprous man; he is unclean. The priest shall surely pronounce him unclean; his disease is on his head.
And the man with a leprous disease in whom the disease is, his clothes shall be torn, and the hair of his head shall go loose, and he shall cover his upper lip, and shall cry, Unclean, unclean.
All the days in which the disease is in him he shall be unclean; he is unclean. He shall dwell alone; his dwelling shall be outside the camp.
The garment also that a leprous disease is in, whether it be a woolen garment, or a linen garment,
whether it be in warp, or woof, of linen, or of woolen, whether in a skin, or in anything made of skin,
if the disease is greenish or reddish in the garment, or in the skin, or in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything of skin, it is a leprous disease, and shall be shown to the priest.
And the priest shall look upon the disease, and shut up the disease seven days.
And he shall look on the disease on the seventh day. If the disease has spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in the skin, whatever service skin is used for, the disease is a fretting leprosy, it is unclean.
And he shall burn the garment, whether the warp or the woof, in woolen or in linen, or anything of skin, in which the disease is, for it is a fretting leprosy. It shall be burnt in the fire.
And if the priest shall look, and, behold, the disease has not spread in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything of skin,
then the priest shall command that they wash the thing in which the disease is, and he shall shut it up seven more days.
And the priest shall look, after the disease is washed, and, behold, if the disease has not changed its color, and the disease has not spread, it is unclean. Thou shall burn it in the fire. It is a fret, whether the bareness be inside or outside.
And if the priest looks, and, behold, the disease is dim after the washing of it, then he shall tear it out of the garment, or out of the skin, or out of the warp, or out of the woof.
And if it still appears in the garment, either in the warp, or in the woof, or in anything of skin, it is breaking out. Thou shall burn that in which the disease is with fire.
And the garment, either the warp, or the woof, or whatever thing of skin it be, which thou shall wash, if the disease has departed from them, then it shall be washed the second time, and shall be clean.
This is the law of a leprous disease in a garment of woolen or linen, either in the warp, or the woof, or anything of skin, to pronounce it clean, or to pronounce it unclean.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
He shall be brought to the priest,
and the priest shall go forth out of the camp. And the priest shall look, and, behold, if a leprous disease be healed in the man with a leprous disease,
then the priest shall command to take two living clean birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop for him who is to be cleansed.
And the priest shall command to kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water.
As for the living bird, he shall take it, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet, and the hyssop, and shall dip them and the living bird in the blood of the bird that was killed over the running water.
And he shall sprinkle seven times upon him who is to be cleansed from the leprous disease, and shall pronounce him clean, and shall let the living bird go into the open field.
And he who is to be cleansed shall wash his clothes, and shave off all his hair, and bathe himself in water, and he shall be clean. And after that he shall come into the camp, but shall dwell outside his tent seven days.
And it shall be on the seventh day, that he shall shave all his hair off his head and his beard and his eyebrows, even all his hair he shall shave off. And he shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and he shall be clean.
And on the eighth day he shall take two he-lambs without blemish, and one ewe-lamb a year old without blemish, and three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, and one log of oil.
And the priest who cleanses him shall set the man who is to be cleansed, and those things, before Jehovah, at the door of the tent of meeting.
And the priest shall take one of the he-lambs, and offer him for a trespass offering, and the log of oil, and wave them for a wave offering before Jehovah.
And he shall kill the he-lamb in the place where they kill the sin offering and the burnt offering, in the place of the sanctuary. For as the sin offering is the priest's, so is the trespass offering; it is most holy.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the trespass offering, and the priest shall put it upon the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.
And the priest shall take of the log of oil, and pour it into the palm of his own left hand.
And the priest shall dip his right finger in the oil that is in his left hand, and shall sprinkle of the oil with his finger seven times before Jehovah.
And of the rest of the oil that is in his hand the priest shall put upon the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the blood of the trespass offering.
And the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall put upon the head of him who is to be cleansed, and the priest shall make atonement for him before Jehovah.
And the priest shall offer the sin offering, and make atonement for him who is to be cleansed because of his uncleanness, and afterward he shall kill the burnt offering.
And the priest shall offer the burnt offering and the meal offering upon the altar, and the priest shall make atonement for him, and he shall be clean.
And if he is poor, and cannot get so much, then he shall take one he-lamb for a trespass offering to be waved, to make atonement for him, and one tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering, and a log of oil,
and two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, such as he is able to get, and the one shall be a sin offering, and the other a burnt offering.
And on the eighth day he shall bring them for his cleansing to the priest, to the door of the tent of meeting, before Jehovah.
And the priest shall take the lamb of the trespass offering, and the log of oil, and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before Jehovah.
And he shall kill the lamb of the trespass offering. And the priest shall take of the blood of the trespass offering, and put it upon the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot.
And the priest shall pour of the oil into the palm of his own left hand.
And the priest shall sprinkle with his right finger some of the oil that is in his left hand seven times before Jehovah.
And the priest shall put of the oil that is in his hand upon the tip of the right ear of him who is to be cleansed, and upon the thumb of his right hand, and upon the great toe of his right foot, upon the place of the blood of the trespass offering.
And the rest of the oil that is in the priest's hand he shall put upon the head of him who is to be cleansed, to make atonement for him before Jehovah.
And he shall offer one of the turtle-doves, or of the young pigeons, such as he is able to get,
even such as he is able to get, the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, with the meal offering, and the priest shall make atonement for him who is to be cleansed before Jehovah.
This is the law of him in whom is a leprous disease, who is not able to get what pertains to his cleansing.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
When ye have come into the land of Canaan, which I give to you for a possession, and I put a leprous disease in a house of the land of your possession,
then he who owns the house shall come and tell the priest, saying, There seems to me to be as it were a disease in the house.
And the priest shall command that they empty the house before the priest goes in to see the disease, that all that is in the house not be made unclean. And afterward the priest shall go in to see the house,
and he shall look on the disease. And, behold, if the disease is in the walls of the house with hollow streaks, greenish or reddish, and the appearance of it is deeper than the wall surface,
then the priest shall go out of the house to the door of the house, and shut up the house seven days.
And the priest shall come again the seventh day, and shall look. And, behold, if the disease has spread in the walls of the house,
then the priest shall command that they take out the stones in which the disease is, and cast them into an unclean place outside the city.
And he shall cause the house to be scraped inside round about, and they shall pour out the mortar, that they scrape off, outside the city into an unclean place.
And they shall take other stones, and put them in the place of those stones. And he shall take other mortar, and shall plaster the house.
And if the disease comes again, and breaks out in the house, after he has taken out the stones, and after he has scraped the house, and after it is plastered,
then the priest shall come in and look. And, behold, if the disease has spread in the house, it is a fretting leprosy in the house; it is unclean.
And he shall break down the house, the stones of it, and the timber of it, and all the mortar of the house, and he shall carry them forth out of the city into an unclean place.
Moreover he who goes into the house all the while that it is shut up shall be unclean until the evening.
And he who lies in the house shall wash his clothes. And he who eats in the house shall wash his clothes.
And if the priest shall come in, and look, and, behold, the disease has not spread in the house after the house was plastered, then the priest shall pronounce the house clean, because the disease is healed.
And he shall take two birds, and cedar wood, and scarlet, and hyssop to cleanse the house.
And he shall kill one of the birds in an earthen vessel over running water.
And he shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet, and the living bird, and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the running water, and sprinkle the house seven times.
And he shall cleanse the house with the blood of the bird, and with the running water, and with the living bird, and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet,
but he shall let the living bird go out of the city into the open field. So he shall make atonement for the house, and it shall be clean.
This is the law for all manner of a leprous disease, and for a scall,
and for a leprous disease of a garment, and for a house,
and for a rising, and for a scab, and for a bright spot,
to teach when it is unclean, and when it is clean. This is the law of a leprous disease.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When any man has an issue out of his flesh, he is unclean because of his issue.
And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue, whether his flesh runs with his issue, or his flesh has stopped from his issue, it is his uncleanness.
Every bed on which he who has the issue lies shall be unclean, and everything on which he sits shall be unclean.
And whoever touches his bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And he who sits on anything on which he who has the issue sat shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And he who touches the flesh of him who has the issue shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And if he who has the issue spits upon him who is clean, then he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And whatever saddle he who has the issue rides upon shall be unclean.
And whoever touches anything that was under him shall be unclean until the evening. And he who bears those things shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And whomever he who has the issue touches, without having rinsed his hands in water, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And the earthen vessel, which he who has the issue touches, shall be broken, and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water.
And when he who has an issue is cleansed of his issue, then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing, and wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in running water, and shall be clean.
And on the eighth day he shall take to him two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, and come before Jehovah to the door of the tent of meeting, and give them to the priest.
And the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and the priest shall make atonement for him before Jehovah for his issue.
And if any man's seed of copulation go out from him, then he shall bathe all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And every garment, and every skin, on which is the seed of copulation, shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the evening.
The woman also with whom a man shall lie with seed of copulation, they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And if a woman has an issue, and her issue in her flesh is blood, she shall be seven days in her impurity, and whoever touches her shall be unclean until the evening.
And everything that she lies upon in her impurity shall be unclean. Also everything that she sits upon shall be unclean.
And whoever touches her bed shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And whoever touches anything that she sits upon shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
And if it be on the bed, or on anything on which she sits, when he touches it, he shall be unclean until the evening.
And if any man lies with her, and her impurity be upon him, he shall be unclean seven days, and every bed on which he lies shall be unclean.
And if a woman has an issue of her blood many days not in the time of her impurity, or if she has an issue beyond the time of her impurity, she shall be all the days of the issue of her uncleanness as in the days of her impurity; she is unclean.
Every bed on which she lies all the days of her issue shall be to her as the bed of her impurity, and everything on which she sits shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of her impurity.
And whoever touches those things shall be unclean, and shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening.
But if she is cleansed of her issue, then she shall number to herself seven days, and after that she shall be clean.
And on the eighth day she shall take to her two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons, and bring them to the priest, to the door of the tent of meeting.
And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and the priest shall make atonement for her before Jehovah for the issue of her uncleanness.
Thus ye shall separate the sons of Israel from their uncleanness, that they not die in their uncleanness when they defile my tabernacle that is in the midst of them.
This is the law of him who has an issue, and of him whose seed of copulation goes from him, so that he is unclean thereby,
and of her who is sick with her impurity, and of him who has an issue, of the man, and of the woman, and of him who lies with her who is unclean.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they drew near before Jehovah, and died,
and Jehovah said to Moses, Speak to Aaron thy brother, that he not come at all times into the holy place within the veil, before the mercy-seat which is upon the ark, that he not die, for I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy-seat.
with a young bullock for a sin offering, and a ram for a burnt offering.
He shall put on the holy linen tunic, and he shall have the linen breeches upon his flesh, and shall be girded with the linen sash, and he shall be attired with the linen miter. They are the holy garments, and he shall bathe his flesh in water, and put them on.
And he shall take from the congregation of the sons of Israel two he-goats for a sin offering, and one ram for a burnt offering.
And Aaron shall present the bullock of the sin offering, which is for himself, and make atonement for himself, and for his house.
And he shall take the two goats, and set them before Jehovah at the door of the tent of meeting.
And Aaron shall cast lots upon the two goats, one lot for Jehovah, and the other lot for the scapegoat.
And Aaron shall present the goat upon which the lot fell for Jehovah, and offer him for a sin offering.
But the goat, on which the lot fell for the scapegoat, shall be set alive before Jehovah, to make atonement for him, to send him away for the scapegoat into the wilderness.
And Aaron shall present the bullock of the sin offering, which is for himself, and shall make atonement for himself, and for his house, and shall kill the bullock of the sin offering which is for himself.
And he shall take a censer full of coals of fire from off the altar before Jehovah, and his hands full of sweet incense beaten small, and bring it within the veil.
And he shall put the incense upon the fire before Jehovah, that the cloud of the incense may cover the mercy-seat that is upon the testimony, that he not die.
And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy-seat on the east. And he shall sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times before the mercy-seat.
Then he shall kill the goat of the sin offering, that is for the people, and bring his blood within the veil, and do with his blood as he did with the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it upon the mercy-seat, and before the mercy-seat.
And he shall make atonement for the holy place, because of the uncleannesses of the sons of Israel, and because of their transgressions, even all their sins. And so he shall do for the tent of meeting that dwells with them in the midst of their uncleannesses.
And there shall be no man in the tent of meeting when he goes in to make atonement in the holy place until he comes out, and has made atonement for himself, and for his household, and for all the assembly of Israel.
And he shall go out to the altar that is before Jehovah, and make atonement for it. And shall take of the blood of the bullock, and of the blood of the goat, and put it upon the horns of the altar round about.
And he shall sprinkle of the blood upon it with his finger seven times, and cleanse it, and hallow it from the uncleannesses of the sons of Israel.
And when he has made an end of atoning for the holy place, and the tent of meeting, and the altar, he shall present the live goat.
And Aaron shall lay both his hands upon the head of the live goat, and confess over him all the iniquities of the sons of Israel, and all their transgressions, even all their sins. And he shall put them upon the head of the goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a man who is in readiness into the wilderness.
And the goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities to a solitary land. And he shall let the goat go in the wilderness.
And Aaron shall come into the tent of meeting, and shall put off the linen garments, which he put on when he went into the holy place, and shall leave them there.
And he shall bathe his flesh in water in a holy place, and put on his garments, and come forth, and offer his burnt offering and the burnt offering of the people, and make atonement for himself and for the people.
And he shall burn upon the altar the fat of the sin offering.
And he who lets the goat go for the scapegoat shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp.
And the bullock of the sin offering, and the goat of the sin offering, whose blood was brought in to make atonement in the holy place, shall be carried forth outside the camp, and they shall burn in the fire their skins, and their flesh, and their dung.
And he who burns them shall wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in water, and afterward he shall come into the camp.
And it shall be a statute forever to you. In the seventh month, on the tenth day of the month, ye shall afflict your souls, and shall do no manner of work, the home-born, or the stranger who sojourns among you.
For on this day atonement shall be made for you, to cleanse you. Ye shall be clean from all your sins before Jehovah.
It is a sabbath of solemn rest to you, and ye shall afflict your souls. It is a statute forever.
And the priest, who shall be anointed and who shall be consecrated to be priest in his father's stead, shall make the atonement. And he shall put on the linen garments, even the holy garments,
and shall make atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shall make atonement for the tent of meeting and for the altar, and he shall make atonement for the priests and for all the people of the assembly.
And this shall be an everlasting statute to you, to make atonement for the sons of Israel because of all their sins once in the year. And he did as Jehovah commanded Moses.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron, and to his sons, and to all the sons of Israel, and say to them, This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded, saying,
Whatever man there is of the house of Israel, who kills an ox, or lamb, or goat, in the camp, or who kills it outside the camp,
and has not brought it to the door of the tent of meeting, to offer it as an oblation to Jehovah before the tabernacle of Jehovah, blood shall be imputed to that man. He has shed blood, and that man shall be cut off from among his people,
to the end that the sons of Israel may bring their sacrifices, which they sacrifice in the open field, even that they may bring them to Jehovah, to the door of the tent of meeting, to the priest, and sacrifice them for sacrifices of peace offerings to Jehovah.
And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of Jehovah at the door of the tent of meeting, and burn the fat for a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And they shall no more sacrifice their sacrifices to the he-goats, after which they play the harlot. This shall be a statute forever to them throughout their generations.
And thou shall say to them, Whatever man there is of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, who offers a burnt offering or sacrifice,
and does not bring it to the door of the tent of meeting, to sacrifice it to Jehovah, that man shall be cut off from his people.
And whatever man there is of the house of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, who eats any manner of blood, I will set my face against that soul who eats blood, and will cut him off from among his people.
For the life of the flesh is in the blood, and I have given it to you upon the altar to make atonement for your souls, for it is the blood that makes atonement by reason of the life.
Therefore I said to the sons of Israel, No soul of you shall eat blood, nor shall any stranger that sojourns among you eat blood.
And whatever man there is of the sons of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn among them, who takes any beast or bird in hunting that may be eaten, he shall pour out the blood of it, and cover it with dust.
For as to the life of all flesh, the blood of it is with the life of it. Therefore I said to the sons of Israel, Ye shall eat the blood of no manner of flesh, for the life of all flesh is the blood of it. Whoever eats it shall be cut off.
And every soul who eats that which dies of itself, or that which is torn of beasts, whether he be home-born or a sojourner, he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until the evening, then he shall be clean.
But if he does not wash them, nor bathe his flesh, then he shall bear his iniquity.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall not do after the doings of the land of Egypt, in which ye dwelt, and ye shall not do after the doings of the land of Canaan, where I bring you, nor shall ye walk in their statutes.
Ye shall do my ordinances, and ye shall keep my statutes, to walk therein. I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall therefore keep my statutes, and my ordinances, which if a man does, he shall live in them. I am Jehovah.
None of you shall approach to any who are near of kin to him, to uncover nakedness. I am Jehovah.
The nakedness of thy father, even the nakedness of thy mother, thou shall not uncover. She is thy mother. Thou shall not uncover her nakedness,
the nakedness of thy father's wife. It is thy father's nakedness.
The nakedness of thy sister, the daughter of thy father, or the daughter of thy mother, whether born at home, or born abroad, even their nakedness thou shall not uncover.
The nakedness of thy son's daughter, or of thy daughter's daughter, even their nakedness thou shall not uncover, for theirs is thine own nakedness.
The nakedness of thy father's wife's daughter, begotten of thy father, she is thy sister, thou shall not uncover her nakedness.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy father's sister. She is thy father's near kinswoman.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, for she is thy mother's near kinswoman.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy father's brother. Thou shall not approach to his wife. She is thine aunt.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy daughter-in-law. She is thy son's wife. Thou shall not uncover her nakedness.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy brother's wife. It is thy brother's nakedness.
Thou shall not uncover the nakedness of a woman and her daughter. Thou shall not take her son's daughter, or her daughter's daughter, to uncover her nakedness. They are near kinswomen. It is iniquity.
And thou shall not take a wife in addition to her sister, to be a rival to her, to uncover her nakedness, besides the other in her life-time.
And thou shall not approach to a woman to uncover her nakedness, as long as she is impure by her uncleanness.
And thou shall not lie carnally with thy neighbor's wife, to defile thyself with her.
And thou shall not give any of thy seed to make them pass through the fire to Molech, neither shall thou profane the name of thy God. I am Jehovah.
Thou shall not lie with mankind, as with womankind. It is abomination.
And thou shall not lie with any beast to defile thyself with it, nor shall any woman stand before a beast, to lie down with it. It is a perversion.
Do not defile ye yourselves in any of these things. For in all these the nations are defiled which I cast out from before you,
and the land is defiled. Therefore I visit the iniquity of it upon it, and the land vomits out its inhabitants.
Ye therefore shall keep my statutes and my ordinances, and shall not do any of these abominations, neither the home-born, nor the stranger that sojourns among you,
(for all these abominations the men of the land have done, who were before you, and the land is defiled),
that the land not vomit you out also, when ye defile it, as it vomited out the nation that was before you.
For whoever shall do any of these abominations, even the souls that do them shall be cut off from among their people.
Therefore ye shall keep my charge, that ye not practice any of these abominable customs, which were practiced before you, and that ye not defile yourselves in it. I am Jehovah your God.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, and say to them, Ye shall be holy, for I Jehovah your God am holy.
Every man shall fear his mother and his father. And ye shall keep my sabbaths. I am Jehovah your God.
Turn ye not to idols, nor make to yourselves molten gods. I am Jehovah your God.
And when ye offer a sacrifice of peace offerings to Jehovah, ye shall offer it that ye may be accepted.
It shall be eaten the same day ye offer it, and on the morrow. And if any remain until the third day, it shall be burnt with fire.
And if it is eaten at all on the third day, it is an abomination. It shall not be accepted.
But he who eats it shall bear his iniquity, because he has profaned the holy thing of Jehovah, and that soul shall be cut off from his people.
And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shall not wholly reap the corners of thy field, nor shall thou gather the gleaning of thy harvest.
And thou shall not glean thy vineyard, nor shall thou gather the fallen fruit of thy vineyard. Thou shall leave them for the poor man and for the sojourner. I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall not steal, nor shall ye deal falsely, nor lie one to another.
And ye shall not swear by my name falsely, and profane the name of thy God. I am Jehovah.
Thou shall not oppress thy neighbor, nor rob him. The wages of a hired servant shall not abide with thee all night until the morning.
Thou shall not curse the deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the blind, but thou shall fear thy God. I am Jehovah.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment. Thou shall not respect the person of the poor man, nor honor the person of the mighty man, but thou shall judge thy neighbor in righteousness.
Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer among thy people, neither shall thou stand against the blood of thy neighbor. I am Jehovah.
Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart. Thou shall surely rebuke thy neighbor, and not bear sin because of him.
Thou shall not take vengeance, nor bear any grudge against the sons of thy people, but thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. I am Jehovah.
Ye shall keep my statutes. Thou shall not let thy cattle engender with a diverse kind. Thou shall not sow thy field with two kinds of seed, neither shall there come upon thee a garment of two kinds of stuff mingled together.
And whoever lies carnally with a woman, who is a bondmaid, betrothed to a husband, and not at all redeemed, nor freedom given her, they shall be punished. They shall not be put to death, because she was not free.
And he shall bring his trespass offering to Jehovah, to the door of the tent of meeting, even a ram for a trespass offering.
And the priest shall make atonement for him with the ram of the trespass offering before Jehovah for his sin which he has sinned. And the sin which he has sinned shall be forgiven him.
And when ye shall come into the land, and shall have planted all manner of trees for food, then ye shall count the fruit of it as their uncircumcision. Three years they shall be as uncircumcised to you; it shall not be eaten.
But in the fourth year all the fruit of it shall be holy, for giving praise to Jehovah.
And in the fifth year ye shall eat of the fruit of it, that it may yield to you the increase of it. I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall not eat anything with the blood. Neither shall ye use enchantments, nor practice augury.
Ye shall not round the corners of your heads, nor shall thou mar the corners of thy beard.
Ye shall not make any cuttings in your flesh for the dead, nor print any marks upon you. I am Jehovah.
Do not profane thy daughter, to make her a harlot, lest the land fall to whoredom, and the land become full of wickedness.
Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. I am Jehovah.
Do not turn to those who have familiar spirits, nor to the wizards. Do not seek them out, to be defiled by them. I am Jehovah your God.
Thou shall rise up before the hoary head, and honor the face of the old man, and thou shall fear thy God. I am Jehovah.
And if a stranger sojourns with thee in your land, ye shall not do him wrong.
The stranger that sojourns with you shall be to you as the home-born among you, and thou shall love him as thyself, for ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in measures of length, of weight, or of quantity.
Ye shall have just balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hin. I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt.
And ye shall observe all my statutes, and all my ordinances, and do them. I am Jehovah.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Moreover, thou shall say to the sons of Israel, Whoever he is of the sons of Israel, or of the strangers that sojourn in Israel, who gives of his seed to Molech, he shall surely be put to death. The people of the land shall stone him with stones.
I also will set my face against that man, and will cut him off from among his people, because he has given of his seed to Molech, to defile my sanctuary, and to profane my holy name.
And if the people at the land do at all hide their eyes from that man, when he gives of his seed to Molech, and do not put him to death,
then I will set my face against that man, and against his family, and will cut him off, and all who play the harlot after him, to play the harlot with Molech, from among their people.
And the soul that turns to those who have familiar spirits, and to the wizards, to play the harlot after them, I will even set my face against that soul, and will cut him off from among his people.
Sanctify yourselves therefore, and become ye holy, for I am Jehovah your God.
And ye shall keep my statutes, and do them. I am Jehovah who sanctifies you.
For he who curses his father or his mother shall surely be put to death. He has cursed his father or his mother; his blood shall be upon him.
And the man who commits adultery with another man's wife, even he who commits adultery with his neighbor's wife, the adulterer and the adulteress shall surely be put to death.
And the man who lies with his father's wife has uncovered his father's nakedness. Both of them shall surely be put to death, their blood shall be upon them.
And if a man lies with his daughter-in-law, both of them shall surely be put to death. They have wrought perversion. Their blood shall be upon them.
And if a man lies with a man, as with a woman, both of them have committed abomination. They shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
And if a man takes a wife and her mother, it is wickedness. They shall be burnt with fire, both he and they, that there be no wickedness among you.
And if a man lies with a beast, he shall surely be put to death, and ye shall kill the beast.
And if a woman approaches to any beast, and lies down with it, thou shall kill the woman and the beast. They shall surely be put to death; their blood shall be upon them.
And if a man shall take his sister, his father's daughter, or his mother's daughter, and see her nakedness, and she sees his nakedness, it is a shameful thing, and they shall be cut off in the sight of the sons of their people. He has uncovered his sister's nakedness; he shall bear his iniquity.
And if a man shall lie with a woman having her sickness, and shall uncover her nakedness, he has made naked her fountain, and she has uncovered the fountain of her blood. And both of them shall be cut off from among their people.
And thou shall not uncover the nakedness of thy mother's sister, nor of thy father's sister, for he has made naked his near kin. They shall bear their iniquity.
And if a man shall lie with his uncle's wife, he has uncovered his uncle's nakedness. They shall bear their sin; they shall die childless.
And if a man shall take his brother's wife, it is impurity. He has uncovered his brother's nakedness; they shall be childless.
Ye shall therefore keep all my statutes, and all my ordinances, and do them, that the land, where I bring you to dwell in it, not vomit you out.
And ye shall not walk in the customs of the nation which I cast out before you, for they did all these things, and therefore I abhorred them.
But I have said to you, Ye shall inherit their land, and I will give it to you to possess it, a land flowing with milk and honey. I am Jehovah your God, who has separated you from the peoples.
Ye shall therefore make a distinction between the clean beast and the unclean, and between the unclean fowl and the clean. And ye shall not make your souls abominable by beast, or by bird, or by anything with which the ground teems, which I have separated from you as unclean.
And ye shall be holy to me, for I, Jehovah, am holy, and have set you apart from the peoples, that ye should be mine.
A man or also a woman who has a familiar spirit, or that is a wizard, shall surely be put to death. They shall stone them with stones; their blood shall be upon them.

And Jehovah said to Moses, Speak to the priests, the sons of Aaron, and say to them, There shall none defile himself for the dead among his people,
for his mother, and for his father, and for his son, and for his daughter, and for his brother.
And for his sister a virgin, who is near to him, who has had no husband, for her he may defile himself.
He shall not defile himself, who is a chief man among his people, to profane himself.
They shall not make baldness upon their head, neither shall they shave off the corner of their beard, nor make any cuttings in their flesh.
They shall be holy to their God, and not profane the name of their God. For they offer the offerings of Jehovah made by fire, the bread of their God. Therefore they shall be holy.
They shall not take a woman who is a harlot, or profane, neither shall they take a woman put away from her husband, for he is holy to his God.
Thou shall sanctify him therefore, for he offers the bread of thy God. He shall be holy to thee, for I Jehovah, who sanctify you, am holy.
And the daughter of any priest, if she profanes herself by playing the harlot, she profanes her father. She shall be burnt with fire.
And he who is the high priest among his brothers, upon whose head the anointing oil is poured, and who is consecrated to put on the garments, shall not let the hair of his head go loose, nor tear his clothes,
neither shall he go in to any dead body, nor defile himself for his father, or for his mother,
neither shall he go out of the sanctuary, nor profane the sanctuary of his God, for the crown of the anointing oil of his God is upon him. I am Jehovah.
And he shall take a wife in her virginity.
A widow, or one divorced, or a profane woman, a harlot, these he shall not take, but he shall take to wife a virgin of his own people.
And he shall not profane his seed among his people, for I am Jehovah who sanctifies him.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron, saying, Whoever he is of thy seed throughout their generations who has a blemish, let him not approach to offer the bread of his God.
not a blind man, or a lame man, or he who has a flat nose, or anything superfluous,
or a man who is broken-footed, or broken-handed,
or crook-backed, or a dwarf, or who has a blemish in his eye, or is scurvy, or scabbed, or has his testicles broken.
No man of the seed of Aaron the priest, who has a blemish, shall come near to offer the offerings of Jehovah made by fire; he has a blemish, he shall not come near to offer the bread of his God.
He shall eat the bread of his God, both of the most holy, and of the holy,
only he shall not go in to the veil, nor come near to the altar, because he has a blemish, that he not profane my sanctuaries, for I am Jehovah who sanctifies them.
So Moses spoke to Aaron, and to his sons, and to all the sons of Israel.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron and to his sons, that they separate themselves from the holy things of the sons of Israel, which they hallow to me, and that they not profane my holy name. I am Jehovah.
Say to them, Whoever he is of all your seed throughout your generations, that approaches to the holy things, which the sons of Israel hallow to Jehovah, having his uncleanness upon him, that soul shall be cut off from before me. I am Jehovah.
Whatever man of the seed of Aaron being a man with a leprous disease, or has an issue, he shall not eat of the holy things until he is clean. And whoever touches anything that is unclean by the dead, or a man whose seed goes from him,
or whoever touches any creeping thing, by which he may be made unclean, or a man of whom he may take uncleanness, whatever uncleanness he has,
the soul that touches any such shall be unclean until the evening. And shall not eat of the holy things unless he bathe his flesh in water.
And when the sun is down, he shall be clean, and afterward he shall eat of the holy things, because it is his bread.
That which dies of itself, or is torn by beasts, he shall not eat to defile himself with it. I am Jehovah.
They shall therefore keep my charge, lest they bear sin for it, and die in it if they profane it. I am Jehovah who sanctifies them.
There shall no stranger eat of the holy thing. A sojourner of the priest's, or a hired servant, shall not eat of the holy thing.
But if a priest buys any soul, the purchase of his money, he shall eat of it, and such as are born in his house, they shall eat of his bread.
And if a priest's daughter be married to a stranger, she shall not eat of the heave offering of the holy things.
But if a priest's daughter be a widow, or divorced, and have no child, and is returned to her father's house, as in her youth, she shall eat of her father's bread, but there shall no stranger eat of it.
And if a man eats of the holy thing unwittingly, then he shall put the fifth part of it to it, and shall give the holy thing to the priest.
And they shall not profane the holy things of the sons of Israel, which they offer to Jehovah,
and so cause them to bear the iniquity that brings guilt when they eat their holy things, for I am Jehovah who sanctifies them.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron, and to his sons, and to all the sons of Israel, and say to them, Whoever he is of the house of Israel, or of the sojourners in Israel, who offers his oblation, whether it be any of their vows, or any of their freewill offerings, which they offer to Jehovah for a burnt offering,
that ye may be accepted, ye shall offer a male without blemish, of the bullocks, of the sheep, or of the goats.
But whatever has a blemish, that ye shall not offer, for it shall not be acceptable for you.
And whoever offers a sacrifice of peace offerings to Jehovah to accomplish a vow, or for a freewill offering, of the herd or of the flock, it shall be perfect to be accepted; there shall be no blemish in it.
Blind, or broken, or maimed, or having a skin tumor, or scurvy, or scabbed, ye shall not offer these to Jehovah, nor make an offering by fire of them upon the altar to Jehovah.
Either a bullock or a lamb that has anything superfluous or lacking in his parts, that thou may offer for a freewill offering, but it shall not be accepted for a vow.
That which has its testicles bruised, or crushed, or broken, or cut, ye shall not offer to Jehovah, neither shall ye do thus in your land.
Neither from the hand of a foreigner shall ye offer the bread of your God of any of these, because their corruption is in them; there is a blemish in them. They shall not be accepted for you.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat, is brought forth, then it shall be seven days under the dam, and from the eighth day and after that it shall be accepted for the oblation of an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And whether it be cow or ewe, ye shall not kill it and its young both in one day.
And when ye sacrifice a sacrifice of thanksgiving to Jehovah, ye shall sacrifice it that ye may be accepted.
It shall be eaten on the same day. Ye shall leave none of it until the morning. I am Jehovah.
Therefore ye shall keep my commandments, and do them. I am Jehovah.
And ye shall not profane my holy name, but I will be hallowed among the sons of Israel. I am Jehovah who hallows you,
who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. I am Jehovah.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, The set feasts of Jehovah, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, even these are my set feasts.
Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day is a sabbath of solemn rest, a holy convocation. Ye shall do no manner of work. It is a sabbath to Jehovah in all your dwellings.
In the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month at evening, is Jehovah's Passover.
And on the fifteenth day of the same month is the feast of unleavened bread to Jehovah. Ye shall eat unleavened bread seven days.
In the first day ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
But ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah seven days. In the seventh day is a holy convocation, ye shall do no job work.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When ye have come into the land which I give to you, and shall reap the harvest of it, then ye shall bring the sheaf of the first-fruits of your harvest to the priest.
And he shall wave the sheaf before Jehovah, to be accepted for you. On the morrow after the sabbath the priest shall wave it.
And in the day when ye wave the sheaf, ye shall offer a he-lamb without blemish a year old for a burnt offering to Jehovah.
And the meal offering of it shall be two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with oil, an offering made by fire to Jehovah for a sweet savor. And the drink offering of it shall be of wine, the fourth part of a hin.
And ye shall eat neither bread, nor parched grain, nor fresh ears, until this selfsame day, until ye have brought the oblation of your God. It is a statute forever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
And ye shall count to you from the morrow after the sabbath, from the day that ye brought the sheaf of the wave offering, there shall be complete seven sabbaths.
Ye shall number fifty days, even to the morrow after the seventh sabbath, and ye shall offer a new meal offering to Jehovah.
Ye shall bring out of your habitations two wave-loaves of two tenth parts of an ephah. They shall be of fine flour. They shall be baked with leaven, for first-fruits to Jehovah.
And ye shall present with the bread seven lambs without blemish a year old, and one young bullock, and two rams. They shall be a burnt offering to Jehovah, with their meal offering, and their drink offerings, even an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And ye shall offer one he-goat for a sin offering, and two he-lambs a year old for a sacrifice of peace offerings.
And the priest shall wave them with the bread of the first-fruits for a wave offering before Jehovah, with the two lambs. They shall be holy to Jehovah for the priest.
And ye shall make proclamation on the selfsame day, there shall be a holy convocation to you. Ye shall do no job work. It is a statute forever in all your dwellings throughout your generations.
And when ye reap the harvest of your land, thou shall not wholly reap the corners of thy field, neither shall thou gather the gleaning of thy harvest. Thou shall leave them for the poor man, and for the sojourner. I am Jehovah your God.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, In the seventh month, on the first day of the month, shall be a solemn rest to you, a memorial of blowing of trumpets, a holy convocation.
Ye shall do no job work, and ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
However on the tenth day of this seventh month is the day of atonement. It shall be a holy convocation to you, and ye shall afflict your souls, and ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And ye shall do no manner of work in that same day, for it is a day of atonement, to make atonement for you before Jehovah your God.
For whatever soul it be who shall not be afflicted in that same day, he shall be cut off from his people.
And whatever soul it be who does any manner of work in that same day, that soul I will destroy from among his people.
Ye shall do no manner of work. It is a statute forever throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
It shall be to you a sabbath of solemn rest, and ye shall afflict your souls. In the ninth day of the month at evening, from evening to evening, ye shall keep your sabbath.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, On the fifteenth day of this seventh month is the feast of tabernacles for seven days to Jehovah.
On the first day shall be a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
Seven days ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah. On the eighth day shall be a holy convocation to you, and ye shall offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah. It is a solemn assembly; ye shall do no job work.
These are the set feasts of Jehovah, which ye shall proclaim to be holy convocations, to offer an offering made by fire to Jehovah, a burnt offering, and a meal offering, a sacrifice, and drink offerings, each on its own day.
Besides the sabbaths of Jehovah, and besides your gifts, and besides all your vows, and besides all your freewill offerings, which ye give to Jehovah.
However on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, when ye have gathered in the fruits of the land, ye shall keep the feast of Jehovah seven days. On the first day shall be a solemn rest, and on the eighth day shall be a solemn rest.
And ye shall take to you on the first day the fruit of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and boughs of thick trees, and willows of the brook, and ye shall rejoice before Jehovah your God seven days.
And ye shall keep it a feast to Jehovah seven days in the year. It is a statute forever throughout your generations. Ye shall keep it in the seventh month.
Ye shall dwell in booths seven days. All who are home-born in Israel shall dwell in booths,
that your generations may know that I made the sons of Israel to dwell in booths, when I brought them out of the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
And Moses declared to the sons of Israel the set feasts of Jehovah.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Command the sons of Israel, that they bring to thee pure beaten olive oil for the light, to cause a lamp to burn continually.
Aaron shall keep it outside the veil of the testimony, in the tent of meeting, in order from evening to morning before Jehovah continually. It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations.
He shall keep the lamps upon the pure lampstand in order before Jehovah continually.
And thou shall take fine flour, and bake twelve cakes of it. Two tenth parts of an ephah shall be in one cake.
And thou shall set them in two rows, six on a row, upon the pure table before Jehovah.
And thou shall put pure frankincense upon each row, that it may be on the bread for a memorial, even an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
Every sabbath day he shall set it in order before Jehovah continually. It is on the behalf of the sons of Israel, an everlasting covenant.
And it shall be for Aaron and his sons. And they shall eat it in a holy place, for it is most holy to him of the offerings of Jehovah made by fire by a perpetual statute.
And the son of an Israelite woman, whose father was an Egyptian, went out among the sons of Israel. And the son of the Israelite woman and a man of Israel strove together in the camp,
and the son of the Israelite woman blasphemed the Name, and cursed. And they brought him to Moses. And his mother's name was Shelomith, the daughter of Dibri, of the tribe of Dan.
And they put him in ward, that it might be declared to them at the mouth of Jehovah.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Bring forth him who has cursed outside the camp, and let all who heard him lay their hands upon his head, and let all the congregation stone him.
And thou shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Whoever curses his God shall bear his sin.
And he who blasphemes the name of Jehovah, he shall surely be put to death. All the congregation shall certainly stone him. As well the sojourner, as the home-born, when he blasphemes the Name, shall be put to death.
And he who smites any man mortally shall surely be put to death.
And he who smites a beast mortally shall make it good, life for life.
injury for injury, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, as he has caused a blemish in a man, so shall it be rendered to him.
And he who kills a beast shall make it good. And he who kills a man shall be put to death.
Ye shall have one manner of law, as for the sojourner, as for the home-born, for I am Jehovah your God.
And Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, and they brought forth him who had cursed out of the camp, and stoned him with stones. And the sons of Israel did as Jehovah commanded Moses.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses at mount Sinai, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When ye come into the land which I give you, then shall the land keep a sabbath to Jehovah.
Six years thou shall sow thy field, and six years thou shall prune thy vineyard, and gather in the fruits of it,
but in the seventh year shall be a sabbath of solemn rest for the land, a sabbath to Jehovah. Thou shall neither sow thy field, nor prune thy vineyard.
That which grows of itself of thy harvest thou shall not reap, and the grapes of thy undressed vine thou shall not gather. It shall be a year of solemn rest for the land.
for thee, and for thy servant and for thy maid, and for thy hired servant and for thy stranger, who sojourns with thee.
And for thy cattle, and for the beasts that are in thy land, all the increase of it shall be for food.
And thou shall number seven sabbaths of years to thee, seven times seven years, and there shall be to thee the days of seven sabbaths of years, even forty-nine years.
Then thou shall send abroad the loud trumpet on the tenth day of the seventh month. In the day of atonement ye shall send abroad the trumpet throughout all your land.
And ye shall hallow the fiftieth year, and proclaim liberty throughout the land to all the inhabitants of it. It shall be a jubilee to you, and ye shall return every man to his possession, and ye shall return every man to his family.
That fiftieth year shall be a jubilee to you. Ye shall not sow, neither reap that which grows of itself in it, nor gather in it of the undressed vines.
For it is a jubilee; it shall be holy to you. Ye shall eat the increase of it out of the field.
In this year of jubilee ye shall return every man to his possession.
And if thou sell anything to thy neighbor, or buy of thy neighbor's hand, ye shall not wrong each other.
According to the number of years after the jubilee thou shall buy of thy neighbor, and according to the number of years of the crops he shall sell to thee.
According to the multitude of the years thou shall increase the price of it, and according to the fewness of the years thou shall diminish the price of it, for the number of the crops he sells to thee.
And ye shall not wrong each other, but thou shall fear thy God, for I am Jehovah your God.
Therefore ye shall do my statutes, and keep my ordinances and do them, and ye shall dwell in the land in safety.
And the land shall yield its fruit, and ye shall eat your fill, and dwell in safety in it.
And if ye shall say, What shall we eat the seventh year? Behold, we shall not sow, nor gather in our increase,
then I will command my blessing upon you in the sixth year, and it shall bring forth fruit for the three years.
And ye shall sow the eighth year, and eat of the fruits, the old storage, until the ninth year. Until its fruits come in, ye shall eat the old storage.
And the land shall not be sold in perpetuity, for the land is mine. For ye are strangers and sojourners with me.
And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant a redemption for the land.
If thy brother becomes poor, and sells some of his possession, then his kinsman who is next to him shall come, and shall redeem that which his brother has sold.
And if a man has no one to redeem it, and he becomes rich and finds sufficient to redeem it,
then let him reckon the years of the sale of it, and restore the excess to the man to whom he sold it, and he shall return to his possession.
But if he is not able to get it back for himself, then that which he has sold shall remain in the hand of him who has bought it until the year of jubilee. And in the jubilee it shall go out, and he shall return to his possession.
And if a man sells a dwelling-house in a walled city, then he may redeem it within a whole year after it is sold. For a full year he shall have the right of redemption.
And if it be not redeemed within the space of a full year, then the house that is in the walled city shall be made sure in perpetuity to him who bought it, throughout his generations. It shall not go out in the jubilee.
But the houses of the villages which have no wall round about them shall be reckoned with the fields of the country. They may be redeemed, and they shall go out in the jubilee.
Nevertheless the cities of the Levites, the houses of the cities of their possession, the Levites may redeem at any time.
And if a man purchases from the Levites, then the house that was sold, and the city of his possession, shall go out in the jubilee. For the houses of the cities of the Levites are their possession among the sons of Israel.
But the field of the suburbs of their cities may not be sold, for it is their perpetual possession.
And if thy brother becomes poor, and his hand fails with thee, then thou shall uphold him; he shall live with thee as a stranger and a sojourner.
Take thou no interest from him or increase, but fear thy God, that thy brother may live with thee.
Thou shall not give him thy money upon interest, nor give him thy food for profit.
I am Jehovah your God, who brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, to give you the land of Canaan, and to be your God.
And if thy brother becomes poor with thee, and sells himself to thee, thou shall not impose upon him servile labor.
He shall be with thee as a hired servant, and as a sojourner. He shall serve with thee to the year of jubilee.
Then he shall go out from thee, he and his sons with him, and shall return to his own family. And he shall return to the possession of his fathers.
For they are my servants, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt. They shall not be sold as bondmen.
Thou shall not rule over him with rigor, but shall fear thy God.
And as for thy bondmen, and thy bondmaids, whom thou shall have, from the nations that are round about you, ye shall buy bondmen and bondmaids from them.
Moreover of the sons of the strangers who sojourn among you, ye shall buy from them, and from their families that are with you, which they have begotten in your land, and they shall be your possession.
And ye shall make them an inheritance for your sons after you, to hold for a possession. Ye shall take your permanent bondmen from them, but over your brothers the sons of Israel ye shall not rule, one over another, with rigor.
And if a stranger or sojourner with thee becomes rich, and thy brother becomes poor beside him, and sells himself to the stranger or sojourner with thee, or to the stock of the stranger's family,
he may be redeemed after he is sold. One of his brothers may redeem him.
Or his uncle, or his uncle's son, may redeem him. Or any who is near of kin to him of his family may redeem him. Or if he becomes rich, he may redeem himself.
And he shall reckon with him who bought him from the year that he sold himself to him to the year of jubilee. And the price of his sale shall be according to the number of years. He shall be with him according to the time of a hired servant.
If there be yet many years, according to them he shall give back the price of his redemption out of the money that he was bought for.
And if there remain but few years to the year of jubilee, then he shall reckon with him. He shall give back the price of his redemption according to his years.
He shall be with him as a servant hired year by year. He shall not rule with rigor over him in thy sight.
And if he is not redeemed by these means, then he shall go out in the year of jubilee, he, and his sons with him.
For the sons of Israel are servants to me. They are my servants whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.

Ye shall make for you no idols. Neither shall ye rear up for you a graven image, or a pillar. Neither shall ye place any figured stone in your land, to bow down to it. For I am Jehovah your God.
Ye shall keep my sabbaths, and reverence my sanctuary. I am Jehovah.
If ye walk in my statutes, and keep my commandments, and do them,
then I will give your rains in their season, and the land shall yield its increase, and the trees of the field shall yield their fruit.
And your threshing shall reach to the vintage, and the vintage shall reach to the sowing time, and ye shall eat your bread to the full, and dwell in your land safely.
And I will give peace in the land, and ye shall lie down, and none shall make you afraid. And I will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land, nor shall the sword go through your land.
And ye shall chase your enemies, and they shall fall before you by the sword.
And five of you shall chase a hundred, and a hundred of you shall chase ten thousand, and your enemies shall fall before you by the sword.
And I will have respect to you, and make you fruitful, and multiply you, and will establish my covenant with you.
And ye shall eat old storage long kept, and ye shall bring forth the old because of the new.
And I will set my tabernacle among you, and my soul shall not abhor you.
And I will walk among you, and will be your God, and ye shall be my people.
I am Jehovah your God, who brought you forth out of the land of Egypt, that ye should not be their bondmen. And I have broken the bars of your yoke, and made you go upright.
But if ye will not hearken to me, and will not do all these commandments,
and if ye shall reject my statutes, and if your soul abhors my ordinances, so that ye will not do all my commandments, but break my covenant,
I will appoint terror over you, even consumption and fever, that shall consume the eyes, and make the soul to pine away. And ye shall sow your seed in vain, for your enemies shall eat it.
And I will set my face against you, and ye shall be smitten before your enemies. Those who hate you shall rule over you, and ye shall flee when no man pursues you.
And if for these things ye will not yet hearken to me, then I will chastise you seven times more for your sins.
And I will break the pride of your power. And I will make your sky as iron, and your earth as brass,
and your strength shall be spent in vain, for your land shall not yield its increase, nor shall the trees of the land yield their fruit.
And if ye walk contrary to me, and will not hearken to me, I will bring seven times more plagues upon you according to your sins.
And I will send the beast of the field among you, which shall rob you of your sons, and destroy your cattle, and make you few in number, and your ways shall become desolate.
And if by these things ye will not be reformed to me, but will walk contrary to me,
then I also will walk contrary to you, and I will smite you, even I, seven times for your sins.
And I will bring a sword upon you that shall execute the vengeance of the covenant, and ye shall be gathered together within your cities. And I will send the pestilence among you, and ye shall be delivered into the hand of the enemy.
When I break your staff of bread, ten women shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver your bread again by weight, and ye shall eat, and not be satisfied.
And if for all this ye will not hearken to me, but walk contrary to me,
then I will walk contrary to you in wrath, and I also will chastise you seven times for your sins.
And ye shall eat the flesh of your sons, and the flesh of your daughters ye shall eat.
And I will destroy your high places, and cut down your sun-images, and cast your dead bodies upon the bodies of your idols, and my soul shall abhor you.
And I will make your cities a waste, and will bring your sanctuaries to desolation, and I will not smell the savor of your sweet odors.
And I will bring the land into desolation, and your enemies who dwell in it shall be astonished at it.
And I will scatter you among the nations, and I will draw out the sword after you, and your land shall be a desolation, and your cities shall be a waste.
Then the land shall enjoy its sabbaths, as long as it lies desolate, and ye are in your enemies' land, even then shall the land rest, and enjoy its sabbaths.
As long as it lies desolate it shall have rest, even the rest which it had not in your sabbaths, when ye dwelt upon it.
And as for those who are left of you, I will send a faintness into their heart in the lands of their enemies. And the sound of a driven leaf shall chase them, and they shall flee as a man flees from the sword, and they shall fall when no man pursues.
And they shall stumble one upon another, as it were before the sword, when no man pursues. And ye shall have no power to stand before your enemies.
And ye shall perish among the nations, and the land of your enemies shall eat you up.
And those who are left of you shall pine away in their iniquity in your enemies' lands, and also in the iniquities of their fathers they shall pine away with them.
And they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, in their trespass which they trespassed against me, and also that, because they walked contrary to me,
I also walked contrary to them, and brought them into the land of their enemies. If then their uncircumcised heart be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity,
then I will remember my covenant with Jacob, and also my covenant with Isaac, and also my covenant with Abraham will I remember, and I will remember the land.
The land also shall be left by them, and shall enjoy its sabbaths while it lies desolate without them. And they shall accept of the punishment of their iniquity, because, even because they rejected my ordinances, and their soul abhorred my statutes.
And yet for all that, when they are in the land of their enemies, I will not reject them, neither will I abhor them, to destroy them utterly, and to break my covenant with them, for I am Jehovah their God,
but for their sakes I will remember the covenant of their ancestors, whom I brought forth out of the land of Egypt in the sight of the nations, that I might be their God. I am Jehovah.
These are the statutes and ordinances and laws, which Jehovah made between him and the sons of Israel at mount Sinai by Moses.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When a man shall accomplish a vow, the persons shall be for Jehovah by thy estimation.
And thy estimation shall be of the male from twenty years old even to sixty years old, even thy estimation shall be fifty shekels of silver, after the shekel of the sanctuary.
And if it be a female, then thy estimation shall be thirty shekels.
And if it be from five years old even to twenty years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male twenty shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
And if it be from a month old even to five years old, then thy estimation shall be of the male five shekels of silver, and for the female thy estimation shall be three shekels of silver.
And if it be from sixty years old and upward, if it be a male, then thy estimation shall be fifteen shekels, and for the female ten shekels.
But if he be poorer than thy estimation, then he shall be set before the priest, and the priest shall value him; according to the ability of him who vowed shall the priest value him.
And if it be a beast, of which men offer an oblation to Jehovah, all that any man gives of such to Jehovah shall be holy.
He shall not alter it, nor change it, a good for a bad, or a bad for a good. And if he shall at all change beast for beast, then both it and that for which it is changed shall be holy.
And if it be any unclean beast, of which they do not offer an oblation to Jehovah, then he shall set the beast before the priest,
and the priest shall value it, whether it be good or bad. As thou the priest values it, so shall it be.
But if he will indeed redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of it to thy estimation.
And when a man shall sanctify his house to be holy to Jehovah, then the priest shall estimate it, whether it be good or bad. As the priest shall estimate it, so shall it stand.
And if he who sanctified it will redeem his house, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation to it, and it shall be his.
And if a man shall sanctify to Jehovah part of the field of his possession, then thy estimation shall be according to the sowing of it, the sowing of a homer of barley at fifty shekels of silver.
If he sanctifies his field from the year of jubilee, according to thy estimation it shall stand.
But if he sanctifies his field after the jubilee, then the priest shall reckon to him the money according to the years that remain to the year of jubilee, and an abatement shall be made from thy estimation.
And if he who sanctified the field will indeed redeem it, then he shall add the fifth part of the money of thy estimation to it, and it shall be assured to him.
And if he will not redeem the field, or if he has sold the field to another man, it shall not be redeemed any more,
but the field, when it goes out in the jubilee, shall be holy to Jehovah, as a field set apart; the possession of it shall be the priest's.
And if he sanctifies to Jehovah a field which he has bought, which is not of the field of his possession,
then the priest shall reckon to him the worth of thy estimation to the year of jubilee, and he shall give thine estimation in that day, as a holy thing to Jehovah.
In the year of jubilee the field shall return to him of whom it was bought, even to him to whom the possession of the land belongs.
And all thy estimations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary; twenty gerahs shall be the shekel.
Only the firstling among beasts, which is made a firstling to Jehovah, no man shall sanctify it, whether it be ox or sheep, it is Jehovah's.
And if it be of an unclean beast, then he shall ransom it according to thine estimation, and shall add to it the fifth part of it, or if it be not redeemed, then it shall be sold according to thy estimation.
Notwithstanding, nothing set apart, that a man shall set apart to Jehovah of all that he has, whether of man or beast, or of the field of his possession, shall be sold or redeemed; everything set apart is most holy to Jehovah.
No one set apart, who shall be set apart from among men, shall be ransomed; he shall surely be put to death.
And all the tithe of the land, whether of the seed of the land, or of the fruit of the tree, is Jehovah's; it is holy to Jehovah.
And if a man will redeem any of his tithe, he shall add to it the fifth part of it.
And all the tithe of the herd or the flock, whatever passes under the rod, the tenth shall be holy to Jehovah.
He shall not search whether it be good or bad, neither shall he change it. And if he changes it at all, then both it and that for which it is changed shall be holy; it shall not be redeemed.
These are the commandments, which Jehovah commanded Moses for the sons of Israel at mount Sinai.

Numbers

And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the tent of meeting, on the first day of the second month, in the second year after they came out of the land of Egypt, saying,
Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, every male, by their polls,
from twenty years old and upward, all who are able to go forth to war in Israel. Thou and Aaron shall number them by their armies.
And with you there shall be a man of every tribe, each one head of his fathers' house.
Elizur the son of Shedeur.
Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
Nethanel the son of Zuar.
Eliab the son of Helon.
Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
Abidan the son of Gideoni.
Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
Pagiel the son of Ochran.
Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
Ahira the son of Enan.
These are those who were called from the congregation, the rulers of the tribes of their fathers. They were the heads of the thousands of Israel.
And Moses and Aaron took these men who are mentioned by name,
and they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of the second month. And they declared their ancestry after their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, by their polls.
As Jehovah commanded Moses, so he numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai.
And the sons of Reuben, Israel's firstborn, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Reuben, were forty-six thousand and five hundred.
Of the sons of Simeon, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, those who were numbered of it, according to the number of the names, by their polls, every male from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Simeon, were fifty-nine thousand and three hundred.
Of the sons of Gad, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Gad, were forty-five thousand six hundred and fifty.
Of the sons of Judah, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Judah, were seventy-four thousand and six hundred.
Of the sons of Issachar, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Issachar, were fifty-four thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Zebulun, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Zebulun, were fifty-seven thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Joseph, namely, of the sons of Ephraim, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Ephraim, were forty thousand and five hundred;
of the sons of Manasseh, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Manasseh, were thirty-two thousand and two hundred.
Of the sons of Benjamin, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Benjamin, were thirty-five thousand and four hundred.
Of the sons of Dan, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Dan, were sixty-two thousand and seven hundred.
Of the sons of Asher, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Asher, were forty-one thousand and five hundred.
Of the sons of Naphtali, their generations, by their families, by their fathers' houses, according to the number of the names, from twenty years old and upward, all that were able to go forth to war,
those who were numbered of them, of the tribe of Naphtali, were fifty-three thousand and four hundred.
These are those who were numbered, whom Moses and Aaron numbered, and the rulers of Israel, being twelve men. They were each one for his fathers' house.
So all those who were numbered of the sons of Israel by their fathers' houses, from twenty years old and upward, all who were able to go forth to war in Israel,
even all those who were numbered were six hundred three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites according to the tribe of their fathers were not numbered among them.
For Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Only the tribe of Levi thou shall not number, neither shall thou take the sum of them among the sons of Israel,
but appoint thou the Levites over the tabernacle of the testimony, and over all the furniture of it, and over all that belongs to it. They shall bear the tabernacle, and all the furniture of it, and they shall minister to it, and shall encamp round about the tabernacle.
And when the tabernacle sets forward, the Levites shall take it down, and when the tabernacle is to be pitched, the Levites shall set it up. And the stranger who comes near shall be put to death.
And the sons of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by his own camp, and every man by his own standard, according to their armies.
But the Levites shall encamp round about the tabernacle of the testimony, that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the sons of Israel. And the Levites shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of the testimony.
Thus did the sons of Israel. According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so they did.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
The sons of Israel shall encamp every man by his own standard, with the ensigns of their fathers' houses. They shall encamp round about opposite the tent of meeting.
And those who encamp on the east side toward the sunrise shall be those of the standard of the camp of Judah, according to their armies. And the ruler of the sons of Judah shall be Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
And his army, and those who were numbered of them, were seventy-four thousand and six hundred.
And those who encamp next to him shall be the tribe of Issachar. And the ruler of the sons of Issachar shall be Nethanel the son of Zuar.
And his army, and those who were numbered of it, were fifty-four thousand and four hundred.
Then the tribe of Zebulun. And the ruler of the sons of Zebulun shall be Eliab the son of Helon.
And his army, and those who were numbered of it, were fifty-seven thousand and four hundred.
All who were numbered of the camp of Judah were a hundred eighty-six thousand and four hundred, according to their armies. They shall set forth first.
On the south side shall be the standard of the camp of Reuben according to their armies. And the ruler of the sons of Reuben shall be Elizur the son of Shedeur.
And his army, and those who were numbered of it, were forty-six thousand and five hundred.
And those who encamp next to him shall be the tribe of Simeon. And the ruler of the sons of Simeon shall be Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
And his army, and those who were numbered of them, were fifty-nine thousand and three hundred.
Then the tribe of Gad. And the ruler of the sons of Gad shall be Eliasaph the son of Reuel.
And his army, and those who were numbered of them, were forty-five thousand and six hundred and fifty.
All who were numbered of the camp of Reuben were a hundred fifty-one thousand and four hundred and fifty, according to their armies. And they shall set forth second.
Then the tent of meeting shall set forward, with the camp of the Levites in the midst of the camps. As they encamp, so shall they set forward, every man in his place, by their standards.
On the west side shall be the standard of the camp of Ephraim according to their armies. And the ruler of the sons of Ephraim shall be Elishama the son of Ammihud.
And his army, and those who were numbered of them, were forty thousand and five hundred.
And next to him shall be the tribe of Manasseh. And the ruler of the sons of Manasseh shall be Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
And his army, and those who were numbered of them, were thirty-two thousand and two hundred.
Then the tribe of Benjamin. And the ruler of the sons of Benjamin shall be Abidan the son of Gideoni.
And his army, and those who were numbered of them, were thirty-five thousand and four hundred.
All who were numbered of the camp of Ephraim were a hundred eight thousand and a hundred, according to their armies. And they shall set forth third.
On the north side shall be the standard of the camp of Dan according to their armies. And the ruler of the sons of Dan shall be Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
And his army, and those who were numbered of them, were sixty-two thousand and seven hundred.
And those who encamp next to him shall be the tribe of Asher. And the ruler of the sons of Asher shall be Pagiel the son of Ochran.
And his army, and those who were numbered of them, were forty-one thousand and five hundred.
Then the tribe of Naphtali. And the ruler of the sons of Naphtali shall be Ahira the son of Enan.
And his army, and those who were numbered of them, were fifty-three thousand and four hundred.
All that were numbered of the camp of Dan were a hundred fifty-seven thousand and six hundred. They shall set forth rearmost by their standards.
These are those who were numbered of the sons of Israel by their fathers' houses. All who were numbered of the camps according to their armies were six hundred three thousand and five hundred and fifty.
But the Levites were not numbered among the sons of Israel, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Thus did the sons of Israel. According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so they encamped by their standards, and so they set forward, everyone by their families, according to their fathers' houses.

Nadab the firstborn, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
These are the names of the sons of Aaron, the priests who were anointed, whom he consecrated to minister in the priest's office.
And Nadab and Abihu died before Jehovah when they offered strange fire before Jehovah in the wilderness of Sinai, and they had no sons. And Eleazar and Ithamar ministered in the priest's office in the presence of Aaron their father.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Bring the tribe of Levi near, and set them before Aaron the priest, that they may minister to him.
And they shall keep his charge, and the charge of the whole congregation before the tent of meeting, to do the service of the tabernacle.
And they shall keep all the furniture of the tent of meeting, and the charge of the sons of Israel, to do the service of the tabernacle.
And thou shall give the Levites to Aaron and to his sons. They are wholly given to him on the behalf of the sons of Israel.
And thou shall appoint Aaron and his sons, and they shall keep their priesthood. And the stranger who comes near shall be put to death.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
And I, behold, I have taken the Levites from among the sons of Israel instead of all the firstborn who opens the womb among the sons of Israel. And the Levites shall be mine,
for all the firstborn are mine. On the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I hallowed to me all the firstborn in Israel, both man and beast. They shall be mine. I am Jehovah.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, saying,
Number the sons of Levi by their fathers' houses, by their families. Thou shall number them, every male from a month old and upward.
And Moses numbered them according to the word of Jehovah, as he was commanded.
Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari.
Libni and Shimei.
Amram, and Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel.
Mahli and Mushi. These are the families of the Levites according to their fathers' houses.
Of Gershon was the family of the Libnites, and the family of the Shimeites. These are the families of the Gershonites.
Those who were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, even those who were numbered of them were seven thousand and five hundred.
The families of the Gershonites shall encamp behind the tabernacle westward.
And the ruler of the fathers' house of the Gershonites shall be Eliasaph the son of Lael.
And the charge of the sons of Gershon in the tent of meeting shall be the tabernacle, and the tent, the covering of it, and the screen for the door of the tent of meeting,
and the hangings of the court, and the screen for the door of the court, which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about, and the cords of it for all the service thereof.
And of Kohath was the family of the Amramites, and the family of the Izharites, and the family of the Hebronites, and the family of the Uzzielites. These are the families of the Kohathites.
According to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, there were eight thousand and six hundred, keeping the charge of the sanctuary.
The families of the sons of Kohath shall encamp on the side of the tabernacle southward.
And the ruler of the fathers' house of the families of the Kohathites shall be Elizaphan the son of Uzziel.
And their charge shall be the ark, and the table, and the lampstand, and the altars, and the vessels of the sanctuary with which they minister, and the screen, and all the service thereof.
And Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest shall be ruler of the rulers of the Levites, with the oversight of those who keep the charge of the sanctuary.
Of Merari was the family of the Mahlites, and the family of the Mushites. These are the families of Merari.
And those who were numbered of them, according to the number of all the males, from a month old and upward, were six thousand and two hundred.
And the ruler of the fathers' house of the families of Merari was Zuriel the son of Abihail. They shall encamp on the side of the tabernacle northward.
And the appointed charge of the sons of Merari shall be the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars of it, and the pillars of it, and the sockets of it, and all the instruments of it, and all the service thereof,
and the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pegs, and their cords.
And those who encamp before the tabernacle eastward, before the tent of meeting toward the sunrise, shall be Moses, and Aaron and his sons, keeping the charge of the sanctuary for the charge of the sons of Israel. And the stranger that comes near shall be put to death.
All who were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron numbered at the commandment of Jehovah, by their families, all the males from a month old and upward, were twenty-two thousand.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Number all the firstborn males of the sons of Israel from a month old and upward, and take the number of their names.
And thou shall take the Levites for me (I am Jehovah) instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of all the firstlings among the cattle of the sons of Israel.
And Moses numbered, as Jehovah commanded him, all the firstborn among the sons of Israel.
And all the firstborn males according to the number of names, from a month old and upward, of those who were numbered of them, were twenty-two thousand two hundred and seventy-three.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel, and the cattle of the Levites instead of their cattle. And the Levites shall be mine. I am Jehovah.
And for the redemption of the two hundred and seventy-three of the firstborn of the sons of Israel, who are over and above the number of the Levites,
thou shall take five shekels apiece by the poll. According to the shekel of the sanctuary thou shall take them (the shekel is twenty gerahs),
and thou shall give the money, with which the odd number of them is redeemed, to Aaron and to his sons.
And Moses took the redemption-money from those who were over and above those who were redeemed by the Levites.
He took the money from the firstborn of the sons of Israel, a thousand three hundred and sixty-five shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary.
And Moses gave the redemption-money to Aaron and to his sons, according to the word of Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi, by their families, by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old, all who enter upon the service, to do the work in the tent of meeting.
When the camp sets forward, Aaron shall go in, and his sons, and they shall take down the veil of the screen, and cover the ark of the testimony with it.
And shall put on it a covering of certain skin, and shall spread over it a cloth all of blue, and shall put in the staves of it.
And upon the table of showbread they shall spread a cloth of blue, and put on it the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls and the cups with which to pour out. And the continual bread shall be on it.
And they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet, and cover the same with a covering of certain skin, and shall put in the staves of it.
And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the lampstand of the light, and its lamps, and its snuffers, and its snuff dishes, and all the oil vessels of it, with which they minister to it.
And they shall put it and all the vessels of it within a covering of certain skin, and shall put it upon the frame.
And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue, and cover it with a covering of certain skin, and shall put in the staves of it.
And they shall take all the vessels of ministry, with which they minister in the sanctuary, and put them in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of certain skin, and shall put them on the frame.
And they shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple cloth on it.
the firepans, the flesh-hooks, and the shovels, and the basins, all the vessels of the altar. And they shall spread upon it a covering of certain skin, and put in the staves of it.
And when Aaron and his sons have made an end of covering the sanctuary, and all the furniture of the sanctuary, as the camp is set forward, after that, the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it, but they shall not touch the sanctuary, lest they die. These things are the burden of the sons of Kohath in the tent of meeting.
the sanctuary, and the furniture of it.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among the Levites,
but thus do to them, that they may live, and not die, when they approach to the most holy things. Aaron and his sons shall go in, and appoint for them each one to his service and to his burden,
but they shall not go in to see the sanctuary even for a moment, lest they die.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the sum of the sons of Gershon also, by their fathers' houses, by their families,
from thirty years old and upward until fifty years old thou shall number them, all who enter in to wait upon the service, to do the work in the tent of meeting.
They shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle, and the tent of meeting, its covering, and the covering of certain skin that is above upon it, and the screen for the door of the tent of meeting,
and the hangings of the court, and the screen for the door of the gate of the court, which is by the tabernacle and by the altar round about, and their cords, and all the instruments of their service, and whatever shall be done with them; therein they shall serve.
At the commandment of Aaron and his sons shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites, in all their burden, and in all their service. And ye shall appoint to those in charge all their burden.
This is the service of the families of the sons of the Gershonites in the tent of meeting. And their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
As for the sons of Merari, thou shall number them by their families, by their fathers' houses.
From thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old thou shall number them, each man who enters upon the service, to do the work of the tent of meeting.
the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars of it, and the pillars of it, and the sockets of it,
and the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets, and their pegs, and their cords, with all their instruments, and with all their service. And ye shall appoint the instruments of the charge of their burden by name.
This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari, according to all their service, in the tent of meeting, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
And Moses and Aaron and the rulers of the congregation numbered the sons of the Kohathites by their families, and by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, each man who entered upon the service, for work in the tent of meeting.
And those who were numbered of them by their families were two thousand seven hundred and fifty.
These are those who were numbered of the families of the Kohathites, all who served in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.
And those who were numbered of the sons of Gershon, their families, and by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, each man who entered upon the service, for work in the tent of meeting,
even those who were numbered of them, by their families, by their fathers' houses, were two thousand and six hundred and thirty.
These are those who were numbered of the families of the sons of Gershon, all who served in the tent of meeting, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of Jehovah.
And those who were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, by their families, by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, each man who entered upon the service, for work in the tent of meeting,
even those who were numbered of them by their families, were three thousand and two hundred.
These are those who were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari, whom Moses and Aaron numbered according to the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.
All those who were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and the rulers of Israel numbered, by their families, and by their fathers' houses,
from thirty years old and upward even to fifty years old, each man who entered in to do the work of service, and the work of bearing burdens in the tent of meeting,
even those who were numbered of them, were eight thousand and five hundred and eighty.
According to the commandment of Jehovah they were numbered by Moses, each man according to his service, and according to his burden. Thus they were numbered by him, as Jehovah commanded Moses.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Command the sons of Israel, that they put out of the camp every leper, and every man who has an issue, and whoever is unclean about life.
Ye shall put out both male and female. Ye shall put them outside the camp, that they not defile their camp, in the midst of which I dwell.
And the sons of Israel did so, and put them outside the camp. As Jehovah spoke to Moses, so did the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, When a man or woman shall commit any sin that men commit, so as to trespass against Jehovah, and that soul shall be guilty,
then he shall confess his sin which he has done. And he shall make restitution for his guilt in full, and add to it the fifth part of it, and give it to him in respect of whom he has been guilty.
But if the man has no kinsman to whom restitution may be made for the guilt, the restitution for guilt which is made to Jehovah shall be the priest's, besides the ram of the atonement, by which atonement shall be made for him.
And every heave offering of all the holy things of the sons of Israel, which they present to the priest, shall be his.
And every man's hallowed things shall be his. Whatever any man gives the priest, it shall be his.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, If any man's wife goes aside, and commits a trespass against him,
and a man lies with her carnally, and it be hid from the eyes of her husband, and be kept close, and she be defiled, and there be no witness against her, and she is not taken in the act,
and the spirit of jealousy comes upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she be defiled, or if the spirit of jealousy comes upon him, and he be jealous of his wife, and she is not defiled,
then the man shall bring his wife to the priest, and shall bring her oblation for her, the tenth part of an ephah of barley meal. He shall pour no oil upon it, nor put frankincense on it, for it is a meal offering of jealousy, a meal offering of memorial, bringing iniquity to remembrance.
And the priest shall bring her near, and set her before Jehovah.
And the priest shall take holy water in an earthen vessel. And the priest shall take of the dust that is on the floor of the tabernacle, and put it into the water.
And the priest shall set the woman before Jehovah, and let the hair of the woman's head go loose, and put the meal offering of memorial in her hands, which is the meal offering of jealousy. And the priest shall have in his hand the water of bitterness that causes the curse.
And the priest shall cause her to swear, and shall say to the woman, If no man has lain with thee, and if thou have not gone aside to uncleanness, being under thy husband, be thou free from this water of bitterness that causes the curse.
But if thou have gone aside, being under thy husband, and if thou are defiled, and some man has lain with thee besides thy husband,
then the priest shall cause the woman to swear with the oath of cursing, and the priest shall say to the woman, Jehovah make thee a curse and an oath among thy people when Jehovah makes thy thigh to fall away, and thy body to swell.
And this water that causes the curse shall go into thy bowels, and make thy body to swell, and thy thigh to fall away. And the woman shall say, Truly, Truly.
And the priest shall write these curses in a book, and he shall blot them out into the water of bitterness.
And he shall make the woman drink the water of bitterness that causes the curse. And the water that causes the curse shall enter into her bitter.
And the priest shall take the meal offering of jealousy out of the woman's hand, and shall wave the meal offering before Jehovah, and bring it to the altar.
And the priest shall take a handful of the meal offering, as the memorial of it, and burn it upon the altar, and afterward shall make the woman drink the water.
And when he has made her drink the water, then it shall come to pass, if she is defiled, and has committed a trespass against her husband, that the water that causes the curse shall enter into her bitter, and her body shall swell, and her thigh shall fall away. And the woman shall be a curse among her people.
And if the woman is not defiled, but is clean, then she shall be free, and shall conceive seed.
This is the law of jealousy, when a wife, being under her husband, goes aside, and is defiled,
or when the spirit of jealousy comes upon a man, and he is jealous of his wife. Then he shall set the woman before Jehovah, and the priest shall execute upon her all this law.
And the man shall be free from iniquity, and that woman shall bear her iniquity.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When either man or woman shall make a special vow, the vow of a Nazirite, to separate himself to Jehovah,
he shall separate himself from wine and strong drink. He shall drink no vinegar of wine, or vinegar of strong drink, neither shall he drink any juice of grapes, nor eat fresh grapes or dried.
All the days of his separation he shall eat nothing that is made of the grapevine, from the kernels even to the husk.
All the days of his vow of separation there shall no razor come upon his head. Until the days be fulfilled, in which he separates himself to Jehovah, he shall be holy. He shall let the locks of the hair of his head grow long.
He shall not come near to a dead body all the days that he separates himself to Jehovah.
He shall not make himself unclean for his father, or for his mother, for his brother, or for his sister, when they die, because his separation to God is upon his head.
All the days of his separation he is holy to Jehovah.
And if any man dies very suddenly beside him, and he defiles the head of his separation, then he shall shave his head in the day of his cleansing; on the seventh day he shall shave it.
And on the eighth day he shall bring two turtle-doves, or two young pigeons to the priest, to the door of the tent of meeting.
And the priest shall offer one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, and make atonement for him, because he sinned by reason of the dead, and shall hallow his head that same day.
And he shall separate to Jehovah the days of his separation, and shall bring a he-lamb a year old for a trespass offering. But the former days shall be void, because his separation was defiled.
He shall be brought to the door of the tent of meeting,
one he-lamb a year old without blemish for a burnt offering, and one ewe-lamb a year old without blemish for a sin offering, and one ram without blemish for peace offerings,
and a basket of unleavened bread, cakes of fine flour mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil, and their meal offering, and their drink offerings.
And the priest shall present them before Jehovah, and shall offer his sin offering, and his burnt offering.
And he shall offer the ram for a sacrifice of peace offerings to Jehovah, with the basket of unleavened bread. The priest shall also offer the meal offering of it, and the drink offering of it.
And the Nazirite shall shave the head of his separation at the door of the tent of meeting, and shall take the hair of the head of his separation, and put it on the fire which is under the sacrifice of peace offerings.
And the priest shall take the boiled shoulder of the ram, and one unleavened cake out of the basket, and one unleavened wafer, and shall put them upon the hands of the Nazirite, after he has shaven his separation,
and the priest shall wave them for a wave offering before Jehovah. This is holy for the priest, together with the wave-breast and heave-thigh. And after that the Nazirite may drink wine.
This is the law of the Nazirite who vows, and of his oblation to Jehovah for his separation, besides that which he is able to get. According to his vow which he vows, so he must do after the law of his separation.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Ye shall say to them,
Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee.
Jehovah make his face to shine upon thee, and be gracious to thee.
Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace.
So shall they put my name upon the sons of Israel, and I will bless them.

And it came to pass on the day that Moses made an end of setting up the tabernacle, that he anointed it and sanctified it, and all the furniture of it, and the altar and all the vessels of it, and anointed them and sanctified them.
Then the rulers of Israel, the heads of their fathers' houses, offered. These were the rulers of the tribes. These are those who were over those who were numbered.
six covered wagons, and twelve oxen; a wagon for every two of the rulers, and for each one an ox. And they presented them before the tabernacle.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take it from them, that they may be used in doing the service of the tent of meeting. And thou shall give them to the Levites, to every man according to his service.
And Moses took the wagons and the oxen, and gave them to the Levites.
Two wagons and four oxen he gave to the sons of Gershon, according to their service.
And he gave four wagons and eight oxen to the sons of Merari, according to their service, under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest.
But he gave none to the sons of Kohath, because the service of the sanctuary belonged to them. They bore it upon their shoulders.
And the rulers offered for the dedication of the altar in the day that it was anointed, even the rulers offered their oblation before the altar.
And Jehovah said to Moses, They shall offer their oblation, each ruler on his day, for the dedication of the altar.
And he who offered his oblation the first day was Nahshon the son of Amminadab, of the tribe of Judah.
And his oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
On the second day Nethanel the son of Zuar, ruler of Issachar, offered.
He offered for his oblation one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Nethanel the son of Zuar.
On the third day was Eliab the son of Helon, ruler of the sons of Zebulun.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Eliab the son of Helon.
On the fourth day was Elizur the son of Shedeur, ruler of the sons of Reuben.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Elizur the son of Shedeur.
On the fifth day was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai, ruler of the sons of Simeon.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
On the sixth day was Eliasaph the son of Deuel, ruler of the sons of Gad.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
On the seventh day was Elishama the son of Ammihud, ruler of the sons of Ephraim.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Elishama the son of Ammihud.
On the eighth day was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur, ruler of the sons of Manasseh.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
On the ninth day was Abidan the son of Gideoni, ruler of the sons of Benjamin.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Abidan the son of Gideoni.
On the tenth day was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai, ruler of the sons of Dan.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
On the eleventh day was Pagiel the son of Ochran, ruler of the sons of Asher.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred and thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Pagiel the son of Ochran.
On the twelfth day was Ahira the son of Enan, ruler of the sons of Naphtali.
His oblation was one silver platter, the weight of which was a hundred a thirty shekels, one silver bowl of seventy shekels, after the shekel of the sanctuary, both of them full of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering;
one golden spoon of ten shekels, full of incense;
one young bullock, one ram, one he-lamb a year old, for a burnt offering;
one male of the goats for a sin offering;
and for the sacrifice of peace offerings, two oxen, five rams, five he-goats, five he-lambs a year old. This was the oblation of Ahira the son of Enan.
twelve silver platters, twelve silver bowls, twelve golden spoons,
each silver platter weighing a hundred and thirty shekels, and each bowl seventy. All the silver of the vessels was two thousand and four hundred shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary.
The twelve golden spoons, full of incense, weighed ten shekels apiece, according to the shekel of the sanctuary. All the gold of the spoons was a hundred and twenty shekels.
All the oxen for the burnt offering were twelve bullocks, the rams twelve, the he-lambs a year old twelve, and their meal offering, and the males of the goats for a sin offering twelve.
And all the oxen for the sacrifice of peace offerings was twenty-four bullocks, the rams sixty, the he-goats sixty, the he-lambs a year old sixty. This was the dedication of the altar after it was anointed.
And when Moses went into the tent of meeting to speak with him, then he heard the Voice speaking to him from above the mercy-seat that was upon the ark of the testimony, from between the two cherubim, and he spoke to him.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Aaron, and say to him, When thou light the lamps, the seven lamps shall give light in front of the lampstand.
And Aaron did so. He lit the lamps of it in front of the lampstand, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And this was the work of the lampstand, beaten work of gold. To the base of it, and to the flowers of it, it was beaten work. According to the pattern which Jehovah had shown Moses, so he made the lampstand.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the Levites from among the sons of Israel, and cleanse them.
sprinkle the water of expiation upon them, and let them cause a razor to pass over all their flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and cleanse themselves.
Then let them take a young bullock, and its meal offering-fine flour mingled with oil. And thou shall take another young bullock for a sin offering.
And thou shall present the Levites before the tent of meeting. And thou shall assemble the whole congregation of the sons of Israel,
and thou shall present the Levites before Jehovah. And the sons of Israel shall lay their hands upon the Levites.
And Aaron shall offer the Levites before Jehovah for a wave offering on the behalf of the sons of Israel, that it may be theirs to do the service of Jehovah.
And the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of the bullocks, and offer thou the one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering, to Jehovah, to make atonement for the Levites.
And thou shall set the Levites before Aaron, and before his sons, and offer them for a wave offering to Jehovah.
Thus shall thou separate the Levites from among the sons of Israel, and the Levites shall be mine.
And after that the Levites shall go in to do the service of the tent of meeting. And thou shall cleanse them, and offer them for a wave offering.
For they are wholly given to me from among the sons of Israel; instead of all who open the womb, even the firstborn of all the sons of Israel, I have taken them to me.
For all the firstborn among the sons of Israel are mine, both man and beast. On the day that I smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt I sanctified them for myself.
And I have taken the Levites instead of all the firstborn among the sons of Israel.
And I have given the Levites as a gift to Aaron and to his sons from among the sons of Israel, to do the service of the sons of Israel in the tent of meeting, and to make atonement for the sons of Israel, that there be no plague among the sons of Israel, when the sons of Israel come near to the sanctuary.
Thus did Moses, and Aaron, and all the congregation of the sons of Israel, to the Levites. According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so the sons of Israel did to them.
And the Levites purified themselves from sin, and they washed their clothes. And Aaron offered them for a wave offering before Jehovah, and Aaron made atonement for them to cleanse them.
And after that the Levites went in to do their service in the tent of meeting before Aaron, and before his sons. As Jehovah had commanded Moses concerning the Levites, so they did to them.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
From twenty-five years old and upward they shall go in to wait upon the service in the work of the tent of meeting.
And from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the work, and shall serve no more,
but shall minister with their brothers in the tent of meeting, to keep the charge, and shall do no service. Thus shall thou do to the Levites concerning their charges.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the wilderness of Sinai, in the first month of the second year after they came out of the land of Egypt, saying,
Moreover let the sons of Israel keep the Passover in its appointed season.
In the fourteenth day of this month, at evening, ye shall keep it in its appointed season. According to all the statutes of it, and according to all the ordinances of it, ye shall keep it.
And Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, that they should keep the Passover.
And they kept the Passover in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, at evening, in the wilderness of Sinai. According to all that Jehovah commanded Moses, so did the sons of Israel.
And there were certain men who were unclean by reason of the dead body of a man, so that they could not keep the Passover on that day. And they came before Moses and before Aaron on that day,
and those men said to him, We are unclean by reason of the dead body of a man. Why are we kept back, that we may not offer the oblation of Jehovah in its appointed season among the sons of Israel?
And Moses said to them, Stay ye, that I may hear what Jehovah will command concerning you.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If any man of you or of your generations shall be unclean by reason of a dead body, or be on a journey afar off, yet he shall keep the Passover to Jehovah.
In the second month on the fourteenth day at evening they shall keep it. They shall eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.
They shall leave none of it to the morning, nor break a bone of it. According to all the statute of the Passover they shall keep it.
But the man who is clean, and is not on a journey, and forbears to keep the Passover, that soul shall be cut off from his people, because he did not offer the oblation of Jehovah in its appointed season; that man shall bear his sin.
And if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the Passover to Jehovah, according to the statute of the Passover, and according to the ordinance of it, so shall he do. Ye shall have one statute, both for the sojourner, and for him who is born in the land.
And on the day that the tabernacle was reared up the cloud covered the tabernacle, even the tent of the testimony, and at evening it was upon the tabernacle, as it were the appearance of fire, until morning.
the cloud covered it, and the appearance of fire by night.
And whenever the cloud was taken up from over the tent, then after that the sons of Israel journeyed. And in the place where the cloud abode, there the sons of Israel encamped.
At the commandment of Jehovah the sons of Israel journeyed, and at the commandment of Jehovah they encamped. As long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle they remained encamped.
And when the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle many days, then the sons of Israel kept the charge of Jehovah, and did not journey.
And sometimes the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle, then according to the commandment of Jehovah they remained encamped, and according to the commandment of Jehovah they journeyed.
And sometimes the cloud was from evening until morning, and when the cloud was taken up in the morning, they journeyed, or if by day and by night, when the cloud was taken up, they journeyed.
Whether it was two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud tarried upon the tabernacle, abiding on it, the sons of Israel remained encamped, and did not journey, but when it was taken up, they journeyed.
At the commandment of Jehovah they encamped, and at the commandment of Jehovah they journeyed. They kept the charge of Jehovah, at the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Make thee two trumpets of silver, of beaten work thou shall make them. And thou shall use them for the calling of the congregation, and for the journeying of the camps.
And when they shall blow them, all the congregation shall gather themselves to thee at the door of the tent of meeting.
And if they blow but one, then the rulers, the heads of the thousands of Israel, shall gather themselves to thee.
And when ye blow an alarm, the camps that lie on the east side shall take their journey.
And when ye blow an alarm the second time, the camps that lie on the south side shall take their journey. They shall blow an alarm for their journeys.
But when the assembly is to be gathered together, ye shall blow, but ye shall not sound an alarm.
And the sons of Aaron, the priests, shall blow the trumpets, and they shall be to you for a statute forever throughout your generations.
And when ye go to war in your land against the adversary that oppresses you, then ye shall sound an alarm with the trumpets. And ye shall be remembered before Jehovah your God, and ye shall be saved from your enemies.
I am Jehovah your God.
And it came to pass in the second year, in the second month, on the twentieth day of the month, that the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle of the testimony.
And the sons of Israel set forward according to their journeys out of the wilderness of Sinai, and the cloud abode in the wilderness of Paran.
And they first took their journey according to the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.
And in the first place the standard of the camp of the sons of Judah set forward according to their armies, and over his army was Nahshon the son of Amminadab.
And over the army of the tribe of the sons of Issachar was Nethanel the son of Zuar.
And over the army of the tribe of the sons of Zebulun was Eliab the son of Helon.
And the tabernacle was taken down, and the sons of Gershon and the sons of Merari, who bore the tabernacle, set forward.
And the standard of the camp of Reuben set forward according to their armies, and over his army was Elizur the son of Shedeur.
And over the army of the tribe of the sons of Simeon was Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai.
And over the army of the tribe of the sons of Gad was Eliasaph the son of Deuel.
And the Kohathites set forward, bearing the sanctuary, and the others set up the tabernacle until their coming.
And the standard of the camp of the sons of Ephraim set forward according to their armies, and over his army was Elishama the son of Ammihud.
And over the army of the tribe of the sons of Manasseh was Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur.
And over the army of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin was Abidan the son of Gideoni.
And the standard of the camp of the sons of Dan, which was the rearward of all the camps, set forward according to their armies, and over his army was Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai.
And over the army of the tribe of the sons of Asher was Pagiel the son of Ochran.
And over the army of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali was Ahira the son of Enan.
Thus were the journeys of the sons of Israel according to their armies, and they set forward.
And Moses said to Hobab, the son of Reuel the Midianite, Moses' father-in-law, We are journeying to the place of which Jehovah said, I will give it to you. Come thou with us, and we will do thee good, for Jehovah has spoken good concerning Israel.
And he said to him, I will not go, but I will depart to my own land, and to my kindred.
And he said, Leave us not, I pray thee, inasmuch as thou know how we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou shall be to us instead of eyes.
And it shall be, if thou go with us, yea, it shall be, that whatever good Jehovah shall do to us, the same we will do to thee.
And they set forward from the mount of Jehovah three days' journey. And the ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them three days' journey, to seek out a resting-place for them.
And the cloud of Jehovah was over them by day when they set forward from the camp.
And it came to pass, when the ark set forward, that Moses said, Rise up, O Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let those who hate thee flee before thee.
And when it rested, he said, Return, O Jehovah, to the ten thousands of the thousands of Israel.

And the people were as murmurers, speaking evil in the ears of Jehovah. And when Jehovah heard it, his anger was kindled, and the fire of Jehovah burnt among them, and devoured in the outermost part of the camp.
And the people cried to Moses. And Moses prayed to Jehovah, and the fire abated.
And the name of that place was called Taberah, because the fire of Jehovah burnt among them.
And the mixed multitude that was among them lusted exceedingly. And the sons of Israel also wept again, and said, Who shall give us flesh to eat?
We remember the fish which we ate in Egypt for nothing, the cucumbers, and the melons, and the leeks, and the onions, and the garlic,
but now our soul is dried away. There is nothing at all except this manna to look upon.
And the manna was like coriander seed, and the appearance of it as the appearance of bdellium.
The people went about, and gathered it, and ground it in mills, or beat it in mortars, and boiled it in pots, and made cakes of it. And the taste of it was as the taste of fresh oil.
And when the dew fell upon the camp in the night, the manna fell upon it.
And Moses heard the people weeping throughout their families, every man at the door of his tent. And the anger of Jehovah was kindled greatly, and Moses was displeased.
And Moses said to Jehovah, Why have thou dealt ill with thy servant? And why have I not found favor in thy sight, that thou lay the burden of all this people upon me?
Have I conceived all this people? Have I brought them forth, that thou should say to me, Carry them in thy bosom, as a nurturing father carries the sucking child, to the land which thou swore to their fathers?
From where should I have flesh to give to all this people? For they weep to me, saying, Give us flesh, that we may eat.
I am not able to bear all this people alone, because it is too heavy for me.
And if thou deal thus with me, kill me, I pray thee, out of hand, if I have found favor in thy sight, and let me not see my wretchedness.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Gather to me seventy men of the elders of Israel, whom thou know to be the elders of the people and officers over them. And bring them to the tent of meeting, that they may stand there with thee.
And I will come down and talk with thee there. And I will take of the spirit which is upon thee, and will put it upon them, and they shall bear the burden of the people with thee, that thou not bear it thyself alone.
And say thou to the people, Sanctify yourselves against tomorrow, and ye shall eat flesh, for ye have wept in the ears of Jehovah, saying, Who shall give us flesh to eat? For it was well with us in Egypt. Therefore Jehovah will give you flesh, and ye shall eat.
Ye shall not eat one day, nor two days, nor five days, neither ten days, nor twenty days,
but a whole month, until it comes out at your nostrils, and it be loathsome to you, because ye have rejected Jehovah who is among you, and have wept before him, saying, Why did we come forth out of Egypt?
And Moses said, The people, among whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen, and thou have said, I will give them flesh, that they may eat a whole month.
Shall flocks and herds be slain for them, to suffice them? Or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them, to suffice them?
And Jehovah said to Moses, Is Jehovah's hand grown short? Now thou shall see whether my word shall come to pass to thee or not.
And Moses went out, and told the people the words of Jehovah. And he gathered seventy men of the elders of the people, and set them round about the tent.
And Jehovah came down in the cloud, and spoke to him, and took of the spirit that was upon him, and put it upon the seventy elders. And it came to pass, that, when the spirit rested upon them, they prophesied, but they did so no more.
But there remained two men in the camp, the name of the one was Eldad, and the name of the other Medad. And the spirit rested upon them. And they were of those who were written, but had not gone out to the tent. And they prophesied in the camp.
And a young man ran, and told Moses, and said, Eldad and Medad do prophesy in the camp.
And Joshua the son of Nun, the minister of Moses, one of his chosen men, answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them.
And Moses said to him, Are thou jealous for my sake? Would that all of Jehovah's people were prophets, that Jehovah would put his spirit upon them!
And Moses went into the camp, he and the elders of Israel.
And there went forth a wind from Jehovah, and brought quails from the sea, and let them fall by the camp, about a day's journey on this side, and a day's journey on the other side, round about the camp, and about two cubits above the face of the earth.
And the people rose up all that day, and all the night, and all the next day, and gathered the quails. He who gathered least gathered ten homers. And they spread them all abroad for themselves round about the camp.
While the flesh was yet between their teeth, before it was chewed, the anger of Jehovah was kindled against the people, and Jehovah smote the people with a very great plague.
And the name of that place was called Kibrothhattaavah, because there they buried the people who lusted.
From Kibrothhattaavah the people journeyed to Hazeroth, and they abode at Hazeroth.

And Miriam and Aaron spoke against Moses because of the Cushite woman whom he had married, for he had married a Cushite woman.
And they said, Has Jehovah indeed spoken only with Moses? Has he not spoken also with us? And Jehovah heard it.
Now the man Moses was very meek, above all the men who were upon the face of the earth.
And Jehovah spoke suddenly to Moses, and to Aaron, and to Miriam, Come out ye three to the tent of meeting. And the three came out.
And Jehovah came down in a pillar of cloud, and stood at the door of the tent, and called Aaron and Miriam. And they both came forth.
And he said, Hear now my words. If there be a prophet among you, I Jehovah will make myself known to him in a vision. I will speak with him in a dream.
My servant Moses is not so. He is faithful in all my house.
With him I will speak mouth to mouth, even manifestly, and not in dark speeches, and he has beheld the form of Jehovah. Why then were ye not afraid to speak against my servant, against Moses?
And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against them, and he departed.
And the cloud removed from over the tent. And, behold, Miriam was leprous, as snow. And Aaron looked upon Miriam, and, behold, she was leprous.
And Aaron said to Moses, Oh, my lord, lay not, I pray thee, sin upon us, in which we have done foolishly, and in which we have sinned.
Let her not, I pray, be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed when he comes out of his mother's womb.
And Moses cried to Jehovah, saying, Heal her, O God, I beseech thee.
And Jehovah said to Moses, If her father had but spit in her face, should she not be ashamed seven days? Let her be shut up outside the camp seven days, and after that she shall be brought in again.
And Miriam was shut up outside the camp seven days. And the people journeyed not till Miriam was brought in again.
And afterward the people journeyed from Hazeroth, and encamped in the wilderness of Paran.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Send thou men, that they may spy out the land of Canaan, which I give to the sons of Israel. From every tribe of their fathers ye shall send a man, each one a ruler among them.
And Moses sent them from the wilderness of Paran according to the commandment of Jehovah. All of them men who were heads of the sons of Israel.
of the tribe of Reuben, Shammua the son of Zaccur;
of the tribe of Simeon, Shaphat the son of Hori;
of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh;
of the tribe of Issachar, Igal the son of Joseph;
of the tribe of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Nun;
of the tribe of Benjamin, Palti the son of Raphu;
of the tribe of Zebulun, Gaddiel the son of Sodi;
of the tribe of Joseph, namely, of the tribe of Manasseh, Gaddi the son of Susi;
of the tribe of Dan, Ammiel the son of Gemalli;
of the tribe of Asher, Sethur the son of Michael;
of the tribe of Naphtali, Nahbi the son of Vophsi;
of the tribe of Gad, Geuel the son of Machi.
These are the names of the men that Moses sent to spy out the land. And Moses called Hoshea the son of Nun Joshua.
And Moses sent them to spy out the land of Canaan, and said to them, Get you up this way by the South, and go up into the hill-country.
And see the land, what it is, and the people who dwell in it, whether they are strong or weak, whether they are few or many,
and what the land is that they dwell in, whether it is good or bad, and what cities they are that they dwell in, whether in camps, or in strongholds,
and what the land is, whether it is fat or lean, whether there is wood in it, or not. And be ye of good courage, and bring of the fruit of the land. Now the time was the time of the first-ripe grapes.
So they went up, and spied out the land from the wilderness of Zin to Rehob, to the entrance of Hamath.
And they went up by the South, and came to Hebron. And Ahiman, Sheshai, and Talmai, the sons of Anak, were there. (Now Hebron was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt.)
And they came to the valley of Eshcol, and cut down from there a branch with one cluster of grapes, and they bore it upon a staff between two, also of the pomegranates, and of the figs.
That place was called the valley of Eshcol, because of the cluster which the sons of Israel cut down from there.
And they returned from spying out the land at the end of forty days.
And they went and came to Moses, and to Aaron, and to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, to the wilderness of Paran, to Kadesh, and brought back word to them, and to all the congregation, and showed them the fruit of the land.
And they told him, and said, We came to the land where thou sent us. And surely it flows with milk and honey, and this is the fruit of it.
However the people who dwell in the land are strong, and the cities are fortified, very great, and moreover we saw the sons of Anak there.
Amalek dwells in the land of the South. And the Hittite, and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, dwell in the hill-country. And the Canaanite dwells by the sea, and along by the side of the Jordan.
And Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up at once, and possess it, for we are well able to overcome it.
But the men who went up with him said, We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we.
And they brought up an evil report of the land which they had spied out to the sons of Israel, saying, The land, through which we have gone to spy it out, is a land that eats up the inhabitants of it. And all the people that we saw in it are men of great stature.
And we saw there the giants, the sons of Anak, who come of the giants. And we were in our own sight as grasshoppers, and so we were in their sight.

And all the congregation lifted up their voice, and cried, and the people wept that night.
And all the sons of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron. And the whole congregation said to them, Would that we had died in the land of Egypt, or would that we had died in this wilderness!
And why does Jehovah bring us to this land, to fall by the sword? Our wives and our little ones will be a prey. Were it not better for us to return into Egypt?
And they said one to another, Let us make a captain, and let us return into Egypt.
Then Moses and Aaron fell on their faces before all the assembly of the congregation of the sons of Israel.
And Joshua the son of Nun and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, who were of those who spied out the land, tore their clothes.
And they spoke to all the congregation of the sons of Israel, saying, The land, which we passed through to spy it out, is an exceedingly good land.
If Jehovah delights in us, then he will bring us into this land, and give it to us, a land which flows with milk and honey.
Only do not rebel against Jehovah, neither fear ye the people of the land, for they are bread for us. Their defense is removed from over them, and Jehovah is with us. Fear them not.
But all the congregation bade stone them with stones. And the glory of Jehovah appeared in the tent of meeting to all the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah said to Moses, How long will this people despise me? And how long will they not believe in me, for all the signs which I have wrought among them?
I will smite them with the pestilence, and disinherit them, and will make of thee a nation greater and mightier than they.
And Moses said to Jehovah, Then the Egyptians will hear it, for thou brought up this people in thy might from among them,
and they will tell it to the inhabitants of this land. They have heard that thou Jehovah are in the midst of this people, for thou Jehovah are seen face to face, and thy cloud stands over them, and thou go before them, in a pillar of cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by night.
Now if thou shall kill this people as one man, then the nations which have heard the fame of thee will speak, saying,
Because Jehovah was not able to bring this people into the land which he swore to them, therefore he has slain them in the wilderness.
And now, I pray thee, let the power of the Lord be great, according as thou have spoken, saying,
Jehovah is slow to anger, and abundant in loving kindness, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and that will by no means clear the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons, upon the third and upon the fourth generation.
Pardon, I pray thee, the iniquity of this people according to the greatness of thy loving kindness, and according as thou have forgiven this people, from Egypt even until now.
And Jehovah said, I have pardoned according to thy word,
but in very deed, as I live, and as all the earth shall be filled with the glory of Jehovah,
because all those men who have seen my glory, and my signs, which I wrought in Egypt and in the wilderness, yet have challenged me these ten times, and have not hearkened to my voice,
surely they shall not see the land which I swore to their fathers, neither shall any of them who despised me see it.
But my servant Caleb, because he had another spirit with him, and has followed me fully, him will I bring into the land into which he went, and his seed shall possess it.
Now the Amalekite and the Canaanite dwell in the valley. Tomorrow turn ye, and get you into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
How long shall I bear with this evil congregation that murmur against me? I have heard the murmurings of the sons of Israel, which they murmur against me.
Say to them, As I live, says Jehovah, surely as ye have spoken in my ears, so will I do to you.
Your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness. And all who were numbered of you, according to your whole number, from twenty years old and upward, who have murmured against me,
surely ye shall not come into the land, concerning which I swore that I would make you dwell in it, except Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.
But your little ones, that ye said would be a prey, them I will bring in, and they shall know the land which ye have rejected.
But as for you, your dead bodies shall fall in this wilderness.
And your sons shall be wanderers in the wilderness forty years, and shall bear your whoredoms, until your dead bodies be consumed in the wilderness.
After the number of the days in which ye spied out the land, even forty days, for every day a year, ye shall bear your iniquities, even forty years, and ye shall know my alienation.
I, Jehovah, have spoken, surely I will do this to all this evil congregation that are gathered together against me. In this wilderness they shall be consumed, and there they shall die.
And the men, whom Moses sent to spy out the land, who returned, and made all the congregation to murmur against him by bringing up an evil report against the land,
even those men who brought up an evil report of the land, died by the plague before Jehovah.
But Joshua the son of Nun, and Caleb the son of Jephunneh, remained alive of those men who went to spy out the land.
And Moses told these words to all the sons of Israel, and the people mourned greatly.
And they rose up early in the morning, and got up to the top of the mountain, saying, Lo, we are here, and will go up to the place which Jehovah has promised, for we have sinned.
And Moses said, Why do ye now transgress the commandment of Jehovah, seeing it shall not prosper?
Do not go up, for Jehovah is not among you, that ye be not smitten down before your enemies.
For there the Amalekite and the Canaanite are before you, and ye shall fall by the sword. Because ye have turned back from following Jehovah, therefore Jehovah will not be with you.
But they presumed to go up to the top of the mountain, nevertheless the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and Moses, did not depart out of the camp.
Then the Amalekites came down, and the Canaanites who dwelt in that mountain, and smote them and beat them down, even to Hormah.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When ye come into the land of your habitations, which I give to you,
and will make an offering by fire to Jehovah, a burnt offering, or a sacrifice, to accomplish a vow, or as a freewill offering, or in your set feasts, to make a sweet savor to Jehovah, of the herd, or of the flock,
then he who offers his oblation shall offer to Jehovah a meal offering of a tenth part of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the fourth part of a hin of oil.
And wine for the drink offering, the fourth part of a hin, thou shall prepare with the burnt offering, or for the sacrifice, for each lamb.
Or for a ram, thou shall prepare for a meal offering two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with the third part of a hin of oil.
And for the drink offering thou shall offer the third part of a hin of wine, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And when thou prepare a bullock for a burnt offering, or for a sacrifice, to accomplish a vow, or for peace offerings to Jehovah;
then he shall offer with the bullock a meal offering of three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour mingled with half a hin of oil.
And thou shall offer for the drink offering half a hin of wine, for an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
Thus shall it be done for each bullock, or for each ram, or for each of the he-lambs, or of the kids.
According to the number that ye shall prepare, so shall ye do to every one according to their number.
All who are home-born shall do these things after this manner, in offering an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And if a stranger sojourns with you, or whoever may be among you throughout your generations, and will offer an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah; as ye do, so he shall do.
For the assembly, there shall be one statute for you, and for the stranger who sojourns with you, a statute forever throughout your generations. As ye are, so shall the sojourner be before Jehovah.
One law and one ordinance shall be for you, and for the stranger who sojourns with you.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When ye come into the land where I bring you,
then it shall be, that, when ye eat of the bread of the land, ye shall offer up a heave offering to Jehovah.
Of the first of your dough ye shall offer up a cake for a heave offering, as the heave offering of the threshing-floor, so shall ye heave it.
Of the first of your dough ye shall give to Jehovah a heave offering throughout your generations.
And when ye shall err, and not observe all these commandments, which Jehovah has spoken to Moses,
even all that Jehovah has commanded you by Moses, from the day that Jehovah gave commandment, and onward throughout your generations,
then it shall be, if it be done unwittingly, without the knowledge of the congregation, that all the congregation shall offer one young bullock for a burnt offering, for a sweet savor to Jehovah, with the meal offering of it, and the drink offering of it, according to the ordinance, and one he-goat for a sin offering.
And the priest shall make atonement for all the congregation of the sons of Israel, and they shall be forgiven, for it was an error, and they have brought their oblation, an offering made by fire to Jehovah, and their sin offering before Jehovah, for their error.
And all the congregation of the sons of Israel shall be forgiven, and the stranger who sojourns among them, for in respect of all the people it was done unwittingly.
And if one soul sins unwittingly, then he shall offer a she-goat a year old for a sin offering.
And the priest shall make atonement for the soul that errs, when he sins unwittingly, before Jehovah, to make atonement for him, and he shall be forgiven.
Ye shall have one law for him who does anything unwittingly, for him who is home-born among the sons of Israel, and for the stranger who sojourns among them.
But the soul that does anything with a high hand, whether he be home-born or a sojourner, the same blasphemes Jehovah, and that soul shall be cut off from among his people.
Because he has despised the word of Jehovah, and has broken his commandment, that soul shall utterly be cut off; his iniquity shall be upon him.
And while the sons of Israel were in the wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks upon the sabbath day.
And those who found him gathering sticks brought him to Moses and Aaron, and to all the congregation.
And they put him in ward, because it had not been declared what should be done to him.
And Jehovah said to Moses, The man shall surely be put to death. All the congregation shall stone him with stones outside the camp.
And all the congregation brought him outside the camp, and stoned him to death with stones, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and bid them that they make for them hems in the borders of their garments throughout their generations, and that they put upon the hem of each border a cord of blue.
And it shall be to you for a hem, that ye may look upon it, and remember all the commandments of Jehovah, and do them, and that ye not follow after your own heart and your own eyes, after which ye use to play the harlot,
that ye may remember and do all my commandments, and be holy to your God.
I am Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, to be your God. I am Jehovah your God.

Now Korah, the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, with Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, and On, the son of Peleth, sons of Reuben, took,
and they rose up before Moses, with certain of the sons of Israel, two hundred and fifty rulers of the congregation, called to the assembly, men of renown,
and they assembled themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said to them, Ye take too much upon you, since all the congregation are holy, every one of them, and Jehovah is among them. Why then do ye lift up yourselves above the assembly of Jehovah?
And when Moses heard it, he fell upon his face.
And he spoke to Korah and to all his company, saying, In the morning Jehovah will show who are his, and who is holy, and will cause him to come near to him, even him whom he shall choose will he cause to come near to him.
Take you censers, Korah, and all his company,
and put fire in them, and put incense upon them before Jehovah tomorrow. And it shall be that the man whom Jehovah chooses, he is holy. Ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levi.
And Moses said to Korah, Hear now, ye sons of Levi.
Is it a small thing to you, that the God of Israel has separated you from the congregation of Israel, to bring you near to himself, to do the service of the tabernacle of Jehovah, and to stand before the congregation to minister to them,
and that he has brought thee near, and all thy brothers the sons of Levi with thee? And ye seek the priesthood also?
Therefore thou and all thy company are gathered together against Jehovah. And Aaron, what is he that ye murmur against him?
And Moses sent to call Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab. And they said, We will not come up.
Is it a small thing that thou have brought us up out of a land flowing with milk and honey, to kill us in the wilderness, but thou must make thyself also a ruler over us?
Moreover thou have not brought us into a land flowing with milk and honey, nor given us inheritance of fields and vineyards. Will thou put out the eyes of these men? We will not come up.
And Moses was very angry, and said to Jehovah, Do not respect thou their offering. I have not taken one donkey from them, neither have I hurt one of them.
And Moses said to Korah, Be thou and all thy company before Jehovah, thou, and they, and Aaron, tomorrow.
And take ye every man his censer, and put incense upon them, and bring ye before Jehovah every man his censer, two hundred and fifty censers, thou also, and Aaron, each his censer.
And they took every man his censer, and put fire in them, and laid incense on it, and stood at the door of the tent of meeting with Moses and Aaron.
And Korah assembled all the congregation against them to the door of the tent of meeting. And the glory of Jehovah appeared to all the congregation.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
Separate yourselves from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment.
And they fell upon their faces, and said, O God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one man sin, and will thou be angry with all the congregation?
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the congregation, saying, Get you up from about the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram.
And Moses rose up and went to Dathan and Abiram, and the elders of Israel followed him.
And he spoke to the congregation, saying, Depart, I pray you, from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins.
So they got up from the tabernacle of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, on every side. And Dathan and Abiram came out, and stood at the door of their tents, and their wives, and their sons, and their little ones.
And Moses said, Hereby ye shall know that Jehovah has sent me to do all these works, for it is not of my own mind.
If these men die the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the visitation of all men, then Jehovah has not sent me.
But if Jehovah makes a new thing, and the ground opens its mouth, and swallows them up, with all that pertains to them, and they go down alive into Sheol, then ye shall understand that these men have despised Jehovah.
And it came to pass, as he made an end of speaking all these words, that the ground split asunder that was under them,
and the earth opened its mouth, and swallowed them up, and their households, and all the men that pertained to Korah, and all their goods.
So they, and all that pertained to them, went down alive into Sheol. And the earth closed upon them, and they perished from among the assembly.
And all Israel that were round about them fled at the cry of them, for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up.
And fire came forth from Jehovah, and devoured the two hundred and fifty men who offered the incense.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, that he take up the censers out of the burning, and scatter thou the fire yonder, for they are holy,
even the censers of these sinners against their own lives, and let them be made beaten plates for a covering of the altar, for they offered them before Jehovah, therefore they are holy, and they shall be a sign to the sons of Israel.
And Eleazar the priest took the brazen censers, which those who were burnt had offered, and they beat them out for a covering of the altar,
to be a memorial to the sons of Israel, to the end that no stranger, who is not of the seed of Aaron, come near to burn incense before Jehovah, that he not be as Korah, and as his company, as Jehovah spoke to him by Moses.
But on the morrow all the congregation of the sons of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the people of Jehovah.
And it came to pass, when the congregation was assembled against Moses and against Aaron, that they looked toward the tent of meeting, and, behold, the cloud covered it, and the glory of Jehovah appeared.
And Moses and Aaron came to the front of the tent of meeting.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Get you up from among this congregation, that I may consume them in a moment. And they fell upon their faces.
And Moses said to Aaron, Take thy censer, and put fire in it from off the altar, and lay incense on it, and carry it quickly to the congregation, and make atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from Jehovah. The plague has begun.
And Aaron took as Moses spoke, and ran into the midst of the assembly. And, behold, the plague had begun among the people. And he put on the incense, and made atonement for the people.
And he stood between the dead and the living, and the plague was stopped.
Now those who died by the plague were fourteen thousand and seven hundred, besides those who died about the matter of Korah.
And Aaron returned to Moses to the door of the tent of meeting, and the plague was stopped.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and take rods from them, one for each father's house, from all their rulers according to their fathers' houses, twelve rods. Write thou every man's name upon his rod.
And thou shall write Aaron's name upon the rod of Levi, for there shall be one rod for each head of their fathers' houses.
And thou shall lay them up in the tent of meeting before the testimony, where I meet with you.
And it shall come to pass, that the rod of the man whom I shall choose shall bud. And I will make to cease from me the murmurings of the sons of Israel, which they murmur against you.
And Moses spoke to the sons of Israel. And all their rulers gave him rods, for each ruler one, according to their fathers' houses, even twelve rods, and the rod of Aaron was among their rods.
And Moses laid up the rods before Jehovah in the tent of the testimony.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses went into the tent of the testimony, and, behold, the rod of Aaron for the house of Levi was budded, and put forth buds, and produced blossoms, and bore ripe almonds.
And Moses brought out all the rods from before Jehovah to all the sons of Israel. And they looked, and took every man his rod.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Put back the rod of Aaron before the testimony, to be kept for a sign against the sons of rebellion, that thou may make an end of their murmurings against me, that they not die.
Thus Moses did. As Jehovah commanded him, so he did.
And the sons of Israel spoke to Moses, saying, Behold, we perish, we are undone, we are all undone.
Every man who comes near, who comes near to the tabernacle of Jehovah, dies. Shall we all of us perish?

And Jehovah said to Aaron, Thou and thy sons and thy fathers' house with thee shall bear the iniquity of the sanctuary, and thou and thy sons with thee shall bear the iniquity of your priesthood.
And thy brothers also, the tribe of Levi, the tribe of thy father, bring thou near with thee, that they may be joined to thee, and minister to thee, but thou and thy sons with thee shall be before the tent of the testimony.
And they shall keep thy charge, and the charge of all the tent. Only they shall not come near to the vessels of the sanctuary and to the altar, that they not die, neither they, nor ye.
And they shall be joined to thee, and keep the charge of the tent of meeting, for all the service of the tent, and a stranger shall not come near to you.
And ye shall keep the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the altar, that there be no more wrath upon the sons of Israel.
And I, behold, I have taken your brothers the Levites from among the sons of Israel. They are a gift to you, given to Jehovah, to do the service of the tent of meeting.
And thou and thy sons with thee shall keep your priesthood for everything of the altar, and for that within the veil, and ye shall serve. I give you the priesthood as a service of gift. And the stranger who comes near shall be put to death.
And Jehovah spoke to Aaron, And I, behold, I have given thee the charge of my heave offerings, even all the hallowed things of the sons of Israel. I have given them to thee by reason of the anointing, and to thy sons, as a portion forever.
every oblation of theirs, even every meal offering of theirs, and every sin offering of theirs, and every trespass offering of theirs, which they shall render to me, shall be most holy for thee and for thy sons.
As the most holy things thou shall eat of it; every male shall eat of it. It shall be holy to thee.
the heave offering of their gift, even all the wave offerings of the sons of Israel. I have given them to thee, and to thy sons and to thy daughters with thee, as a portion forever. Everyone who is clean in thy house shall eat of it.
All the best of the oil, and all the best of the vintage, and of the grain, the first-fruits of them which they give to Jehovah, I have given them to thee.
The first-ripe fruits of all that is in their land, which they bring to Jehovah, shall be thine. Everyone who is clean in thy house shall eat of it.
Everything devoted in Israel shall be thine.
Everything that opens the womb, of all flesh which they offer to Jehovah, both of man and beast shall be thine. Nevertheless the firstborn of man thou shall surely redeem, and the firstling of unclean beasts thou shall redeem.
And those that are to be redeemed of them from a month old shall thou redeem, according to thine estimation, for the money of five shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary (the same is twenty gerahs).
But the firstling of an ox, or the firstling of a sheep, or the firstling of a goat, thou shall not redeem. They are holy. Thou shall sprinkle their blood upon the altar, and shall burn their fat for an offering made by fire, for a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And the flesh of them shall be thine. As the wave-breast and as the right thigh, it shall be thine.
All the heave offerings of the holy things, which the sons of Israel offer to Jehovah, I have given thee, and thy sons and thy daughters with thee, as a portion forever. It is a covenant of salt forever before Jehovah to thee and to thy seed with thee.
And Jehovah said to Aaron, Thou shall have no inheritance in their land, neither shall thou have any portion among them. I am thy portion and thine inheritance among the sons of Israel.
And to the sons of Levi, behold, I have given all the tithe in Israel for an inheritance, in return for their service which they serve, even the service of the tent of meeting.
And henceforth the sons of Israel shall not come near the tent of meeting, lest they bear sin, and die.
But the Levites shall do the service of the tent of meeting, and they shall bear their iniquity. It shall be a statute forever throughout your generations. And among the sons of Israel they shall have no inheritance.
For the tithe of the sons of Israel, which they offer as a heave offering to Jehovah, I have given to the Levites for an inheritance. Therefore I have said to them, Among the sons of Israel they shall have no inheritance.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Moreover thou shall speak to the Levites, and say to them, When ye take from the sons of Israel the tithe which I have given you from them for your inheritance, then ye shall offer up a heave offering of it for Jehovah, a tithe of the tithe.
And your heave offering shall be reckoned to you, as though it were the grain of the threshing-floor, and as the fullness of the winepress.
Thus ye also shall offer a heave offering to Jehovah of all your tithes, which ye receive of the sons of Israel. And from it ye shall give Jehovah's heave offering to Aaron the priest.
Out of all your gifts ye shall offer every heave offering of Jehovah, of all the best of it, even the hallowed part of it out of it.
Therefore thou shall say to them, When ye heave the best of it from it, then it shall be reckoned to the Levites as the increase of the threshing-floor, and as the increase of the wine-press.
And ye shall eat it in every place, ye and your households, for it is your reward in return for your service in the tent of meeting.
And ye shall bear no sin by reason of it, when ye have heaved from it the best of it. And ye shall not profane the holy things of the sons of Israel, that ye not die.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
This is the statute of the law which Jehovah has commanded, saying, Speak to the sons of Israel, that they bring thee a red heifer without spot, in which is no blemish, and upon which a yoke never came.
And ye shall give her to Eleazar the priest, and he shall bring her forth outside the camp, and she shall be killed before his face.
And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger, and sprinkle her blood toward the front of the tent of meeting seven times.
her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, he shall burn.
And the priest shall take cedar-wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer.
Then the priest shall wash his clothes, and he shall bathe his flesh in water. And afterward he shall come into the camp, and the priest shall be unclean until the evening.
And he who burned her shall wash his clothes in water, and bathe his flesh in water, and shall be unclean until the evening.
And a man who is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer, and lay them up outside the camp in a clean place. And it shall be kept for the congregation of the sons of Israel for a water for impurity. It is a sin offering.
And he who gathers the ashes of the heifer shall wash his clothes, and be unclean until the evening. And it shall be to the sons of Israel, and to the stranger who sojourns among them, for a statute forever.
He who touches the dead body of any man shall be unclean seven days.
The same shall purify himself with it on the third day, and on the seventh day he shall be clean, but if he does not purify himself the third day, then the seventh day he shall not be clean.
Whoever touches a dead person, the body of a man who has died, and does not purify himself, defiles the tabernacle of Jehovah. And that soul shall be cut off from Israel, because the water for impurity was not sprinkled upon him. He shall be unclean; his uncleanness is yet upon him.
everyone who comes into the tent, and everyone who is in the tent, shall be unclean seven days.
And every open vessel, which has no covering bound upon it, is unclean.
And whoever in the open field touches a man who is slain with a sword, or a dead body, or a bone of a man, or a grave, shall be unclean seven days.
And for the unclean they shall take of the ashes of the burning of the sin offering, and running water shall be put with that in a vessel.
And a clean man shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water, and sprinkle it upon the tent, and upon all the vessels, and upon the souls who were there, and upon him who touched the bone, or the slain, or the dead, or the grave.
And the clean man shall sprinkle upon the unclean on the third day, and on the seventh day. And on the seventh day he shall purify him. And he shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at evening.
But the man who shall be unclean, and shall not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from the midst of the assembly, because he has defiled the sanctuary of Jehovah. The water for impurity has not been sprinkled upon him; he is unclean.
And it shall be a perpetual statute to them. And he who sprinkles the water for impurity shall wash his clothes, and he who touches the water for impurity shall be unclean until evening.
And whatever the unclean man touches shall be unclean, and the soul who touches it shall be unclean until evening.

And the sons of Israel, even the whole congregation, came into the wilderness of Zin in the first month, and the people abode in Kadesh. And Miriam died there, and was buried there.
And there was no water for the congregation, and they assembled themselves together against Moses and against Aaron.
And the people strove with Moses, and spoke, saying, Would that we had died when our brothers died before Jehovah!
And why have ye brought the assembly of Jehovah into this wilderness, that we should die there, we and our beasts?
And why have ye made us to come up out of Egypt, to bring us in to this evil place? It is no place of seed, or of figs, or of vines, or of pomegranates, neither is there any water to drink.
And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly to the door of the tent of meeting, and fell upon their faces. And the glory of Jehovah appeared to them.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the rod, and assemble the congregation, thou, and Aaron thy brother, and speak ye to the rock before their eyes, that it give forth its water, and thou shall bring forth water to them out of the rock. So thou shall give the congregation and their cattle drink.
And Moses took the rod from before Jehovah, as he commanded him.
And Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly together before the rock, and he said to them, Hear now, ye rebels. Shall we bring forth water to you out of this rock?
And Moses lifted up his hand, and smote the rock with his rod twice, and water came forth abundantly. And the congregation drank, and their cattle.
And Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron, Because ye did not believe in me, to sanctify me in the eyes of the sons of Israel, therefore ye shall not bring this assembly into the land which I have given them.
These are the waters of Meribah, because the sons of Israel strove with Jehovah, and he was sanctified in them.
And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh to the king of Edom, Thus says thy brother Israel, Thou know all the travail that has befallen us,
how our fathers went down into Egypt, and we dwelt in Egypt a long time. And the Egyptians dealt ill with us and our fathers.
And when we cried to Jehovah, he heard our voice, and sent an agent, and brought us forth out of Egypt. And, behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the outermost of thy border.
Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy land. We will not pass through field or through vineyard, neither will we drink of the water of the wells. We will go along the king's highway. We will not turn aside to the right hand nor to the left, until we have passed thy border.
And Edom said to him, Thou shall not pass through me, lest I come out with the sword against thee.
And the sons of Israel said to him, We will go up by the highway. And if we drink of thy water, I and my cattle, then will I give the price of it. Only let me, without doing anything, pass through on my feet.
And he said, Thou shall not pass through. And Edom came out against him with many people, and with a strong hand.
Thus Edom refused to give Israel passage through his border. Therefore Israel turned away from him.
And they journeyed from Kadesh, and the sons of Israel, even the whole congregation, came to mount Hor.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses and Aaron in mount Hor, by the border of the land of Edom, saying,
Aaron shall be gathered to his people, for he shall not enter into the land which I have given to the sons of Israel, because ye rebelled against my word at the waters of Meribah.
Take Aaron and Eleazar his son, and bring them up to mount Hor,
and strip Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son. And Aaron shall be gathered, and shall die there.
And Moses did as Jehovah commanded. And they went up into mount Hor in the sight of all the congregation.
And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments, and put them upon Eleazar his son. And Aaron died there on the top of the mount, and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount.
And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they wept for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.

And the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who dwelt in the South, heard tell that Israel came by the way of Atharim, and he fought against Israel, and took some of them captive.
And Israel vowed a vow to Jehovah, and said, If thou will indeed deliver this people into my hand, then I will utterly destroy their cities.
And Jehovah hearkened to the voice of Israel, and delivered up the Canaanites. And they utterly destroyed them and their cities. And the name of the place was called Hormah.
And they journeyed from mount Hor by the way to the Red Sea, to encompass the land of Edom. And the soul of the people was much discouraged because of the way.
And the people spoke against God, and against Moses, Why have ye brought us up out of Egypt to die in the wilderness? For there is no bread, and there is no water, and our soul loathes this light bread.
And Jehovah sent fiery serpents among the people, and they bit the people, and many people of Israel died.
And the people came to Moses, and said, We have sinned, because we have spoken against Jehovah, and against thee. Pray to Jehovah, that he take away the serpents from us. And Moses prayed for the people.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Make thee a fiery serpent, and set it upon a standard. And it shall come to pass, that everyone who is bitten, when he sees it, shall live.
And Moses made a serpent of brass, and set it upon the standard. And it came to pass, that if a serpent had bitten any man, when he looked to the serpent of brass, he lived.
And the sons of Israel journeyed, and encamped in Oboth.
And they journeyed from Oboth, and encamped at Iyeabarim, in the wilderness which is before Moab, toward the sunrise.
From there they journeyed, and encamped in the valley of Zered.
From there they journeyed, and encamped on the other side of the Arnon, which is in the wilderness that comes out of the border of the Amorites, for the Arnon is the border of Moab, between Moab and the Amorites.
Therefore it is said in the book of the Wars of Jehovah, Vaheb in Suphah, and the valleys of the Arnon,
and the slope of the valleys that inclines toward the dwelling of Ar, and leans upon the border of Moab.
And from there they journeyed to Beer. That is the well of which Jehovah said to Moses, Gather the people together, and I will give them water.
Spring up, O well. Sing ye to it,
the well, which the rulers dug, which the nobles of the people dug, with the scepter, and with their staves. And from the wilderness they journeyed to Mattanah,
and from Mattanah to Nahaliel, and from Nahaliel to Bamoth,
and from Bamoth to the valley which is in the field of Moab, to the top of Pisgah, which looks down upon the desert.
And Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, saying,
Let me pass through thy land. We will not turn aside into field, or into vineyard. We will not drink of the water of the wells. We will go by the king's highway, until we have passed thy border.
And Sihon would not allow Israel to pass through his border, but Sihon gathered all his people together, and went out against Israel into the wilderness, and came to Jahaz, and he fought against Israel.
And Israel smote him with the edge of the sword, and possessed his land from the Arnon to the Jabbok, even to the sons of Ammon, for the border of the sons of Ammon was strong.
And Israel took all these cities. And Israel dwelt in all the cities of the Amorites, in Heshbon, and in all the towns of it.
For Heshbon was the city of Sihon the king of the Amorites, who had fought against the former king of Moab, and had taken all his land out of his hand, even to the Arnon.
Therefore those who speak in proverbs say, Come ye to Heshbon. Let the city of Sihon be built and established.
For a fire has gone out of Heshbon, a flame from the city of Sihon. It has devoured Ar of Moab, the lords of the high places of the Arnon.
Woe to thee, Moab! Thou are undone, O people of Chemosh. He has given his sons as fugitives, and his daughters into captivity, to Sihon king of the Amorites.
We have shot at them. Heshbon is perished even to Dibon, and we have laid waste even to Nophah, which reaches to Medeba.
Thus Israel dwelt in the land of the Amorites.
And Moses sent to spy out Jazer. And they took the towns of it, and drove out the Amorites that were there.
And they turned and went up by the way of Bashan. And Og the king of Bashan went out against them, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Fear him not, for I have delivered him into thy hand, and all his people, and his land. And thou shall do to him as thou did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon.
So they smote him, and his sons and all his people, until there was none left to him remaining. And they possessed his land.

And the sons of Israel journeyed, and encamped in the plains of Moab beyond the Jordan at Jericho.
And Balak the son of Zippor saw all that Israel had done to the Amorites.
And Moab was exceedingly afraid of the people, because they were many. And Moab was distressed because of the sons of Israel.
And Moab said to the elders of Midian, Now will this multitude lick up all that is round about us, as the ox licks up the grass of the field. And Balak the son of Zippor was king of Moab at that time.
And he sent messengers to Balaam the son of Beor, to Pethor, which is by the River, to the land of the sons of his people, to call him, saying, Behold, a people came out from Egypt. Behold, they cover the face of the earth, and they abide opposite me.
Come now therefore, I pray thee, curse for me this people, for they are too mighty for me. Perhaps I shall prevail, that we may smite them, and that I may drive them out of the land. For I know that he whom thou bless is blessed, and he whom thou curse is cursed.
And the elders of Moab and the elders of Midian departed with the rewards of divination in their hand, and they came to Balaam, and spoke to him the words of Balak.
And he said to them, Lodge here this night, and I will bring you word again, as Jehovah shall speak to me. And the rulers of Moab abode with Balaam.
And God came to Balaam, and said, What men are these with thee?
And Balaam said to God, Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, has sent to me, saying,
Behold, the people came out of Egypt, it covers the face of the earth. Now, come curse them for me. Perhaps I shall be able to fight against them, and shall drive them out.
And God said to Balaam, Thou shall not go with them. Thou shall not curse the people, for they are blessed.
And Balaam rose up in the morning, and said to the rulers of Balak, Get into your land, for Jehovah refuses to give me leave to go with you.
And the rulers of Moab rose up, and they went to Balak, and said, Balaam refuses to come with us.
And Balak sent yet again rulers, more, and more honorable than they.
And they came to Balaam, and said to him, Thus says Balak the son of Zippor, Let nothing, I pray thee, hinder thee from coming to me.
For I will promote thee to very great honor, and whatever thou say to me I will do. Come therefore, I pray thee, curse this people for me.
And Balaam answered and said to the servants of Balak, If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of Jehovah my God, to do less or more.
Now therefore, I pray you, tarry ye also here this night, that I may know what Jehovah will speak to me more.
And God came to Balaam at night, and said to him, If the men come to call thee, rise up, go with them, but only the word which I speak to thee, that shall thou do.
And Balaam rose up in the morning, and saddled his donkey, and went with the rulers of Moab.
And God's anger was kindled because he went, and the agent of Jehovah placed himself in the way for an adversary against him. Now he was riding upon his donkey, and his two servants were with him.
And the donkey saw the agent of Jehovah standing in the way, with his sword drawn in his hand, and the donkey turned aside out of the way, and went into the field. And Balaam smote the donkey, to turn her into the way.
Then the agent of Jehovah stood in a narrow path between the vineyards, a wall being on this side, and a wall on that side.
And the donkey saw the agent of Jehovah, and she thrust herself to the wall, and crushed Balaam's foot against the wall. And he smote her again.
And the agent of Jehovah went further, and stood in a narrow place, where was no way to turn either to the right hand or to the left.
And the donkey saw the agent of Jehovah, and she lay down under Balaam. And Balaam's anger was kindled, and he smote the donkey with his staff.
And Jehovah opened the mouth of the donkey, and she said to Balaam, What have I done to thee, that thou have smitten me these three times?
And Balaam said to the donkey, Because thou have mocked me. I would there were a sword in my hand, for now I would have killed thee.
And the donkey said to Balaam, Am not I thy donkey, upon which thou have ridden all thy life long to this day? Was I ever accustomed to do so to thee? And he said, No.
Then Jehovah opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw the agent of Jehovah standing in the way, with his sword drawn in his hand. And he bowed his head, and fell on his face.
And the agent of Jehovah said to him, Why have thou smitten thy donkey these three times? Behold, I have come forth as an adversary, because thy way is perverse before me.
And the donkey saw me, and turned aside before me these three times. Unless she had turned aside from me, surely now I would have even slain thee, and saved her alive.
And Balaam said to the agent of Jehovah, I have sinned, for I knew not that thou stood in the way against me. Now therefore, if it displease thee, I will get back again.
And the agent of Jehovah said to Balaam, Go with the men, but only the word that I shall speak to thee, that thou shall speak. So Balaam went with the rulers of Balak.
And when Balak heard that Balaam came, he went out to meet him to the City of Moab, which is on the border of the Arnon, which is in the outmost part of the border.
And Balak said to Balaam, Did I not earnestly send to thee to call thee? Why did thou not come to me? Am I not able indeed to promote thee to honor?
And Balaam said to Balak, Lo, I have come to thee. Have I now any power at all to speak anything? The word that God puts in my mouth, that shall I speak.
And Balaam went with Balak, and they came to Kiriath-huzoth.
And Balak sacrificed oxen and sheep, and sent to Balaam, and to the rulers that were with him.
And it came to pass in the morning, that Balak took Balaam, and brought him up into the high places of Baal, and he saw from there the outmost part of the people.

And Balaam said to Balak, Build me here seven altars, and prepare me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
And Balak did as Balaam had spoken. And Balak and Balaam offered on every altar a bullock and a ram.
And Balaam said to Balak, Stand by thy burnt offering, and I will go. Perhaps Jehovah will come to meet me, and whatever he shows me I will tell thee. And he went to a bare height.
And God met Balaam, and he said to him, I have prepared the seven altars, and I have offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.
And Jehovah put a word in Balaam's mouth, and said, Return to Balak, and thus thou shall speak.
And he returned to him. And, lo, he was standing by his burnt offering, he, and all the rulers of Moab.
And he took up his oracle, and said, From Aram Balak has brought me, the king of Moab from the mountains of the East. Come, curse Jacob for me, and come, defy Israel.
How shall I curse, whom God has not cursed? And how shall I defy, whom Jehovah has not defied?
For from the top of the rocks I see him, and from the hills I behold him. Lo, it is a people that dwells alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations.
Who can count the dust of Jacob, or number the fourth part of Israel? Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his!
And Balak said to Balaam, What have thou done to me? I took thee to curse my enemies, and, behold, thou have blessed them altogether.
And he answered and said, Must I not take heed to speak that which Jehovah puts in my mouth?
And Balak said to him, Come, I pray thee, with me to another place, from where thou may see them. Thou shall see but the outmost part of them, and shall not see them all, and curse them for me from there.
And he took him into the field of Zophim, to the top of Pisgah, and built seven altars, and offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.
And he said to Balak, Stand here by thy burnt offering, while I meet Jehovah yonder.
And Jehovah met Balaam, and put a word in his mouth, and said, Return to Balak, and thus shall thou speak.
And he came to him. And, lo, he was standing by his burnt offering, and the rulers of Moab with him. And Balak said to him, What has Jehovah spoken?
And he took up his oracle, and said, Rise up, Balak, and hear. Hearken to me, thou son of Zippor.
God is not a man, that he should lie, neither the son of man, that he should repent. Has he said, and will he not do it? Or has he spoken, and will he not make it good?
Behold, I have received to bless. And he has blessed, and I cannot reverse it.
He has not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither has he seen perverseness in Israel. Jehovah his God is with him, and the shout of a king is among them.
God brings them forth out of Egypt. He has as it were the strength of the wild-ox.
Surely there is no enchantment with Jacob, neither is there any divination with Israel. Now it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What has God wrought!
Behold, the people rise up as a lioness, and as a lion he lifts himself up. He shall not lie down until he eats of the prey, and drinks the blood of the slain.
And Balak said to Balaam, Neither curse them at all, nor bless them at all.
But Balaam answered and said to Balak, Did I not tell thee, saying, All that Jehovah speaks, that I must do?
And Balak said to Balaam, Come now, I will take thee to another place. Perhaps it will please God that thou may curse them for me from there.
And Balak took Balaam to the top of Peor, that looks down upon the desert.
And Balaam said to Balak, Build for me here seven altars, and prepare for me here seven bullocks and seven rams.
And Balak did as Balaam had said, and offered up a bullock and a ram on every altar.

And when Balaam saw that it pleased Jehovah to bless Israel, he did not go, as at the other times, to meet with omens, but he set his face toward the wilderness.
And Balaam lifted up his eyes, and he saw Israel dwelling according to their tribes, and the Spirit of God came upon him.
And he took up his oracle, and said, Balaam the son of Beor says, and the man whose eye was closed says,
he says who hears the words of God, who sees the vision of the Almighty, falling down, and having his eyes open,
How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, thy tabernacles, O Israel!
As valleys they are spread forth, as gardens by the river-side, as aloes which Jehovah has planted, as cedar trees beside the waters.
Water shall flow from his buckets, and his seed shall be in many waters, and his king shall be higher than Agag, and his kingdom shall be exalted.
God brings him forth out of Egypt. He has as it were the strength of the wild-ox. He shall eat up the nations his adversaries, and shall break their bones in pieces, and smite them through with his arrows.
He couched, he lay down as a lion, and as a lioness. Who shall rouse him up? He who blesses thee is blessed, And he who curses thee is cursed.
And Balak's anger was kindled against Balaam, and he struck his hands together. And Balak said to Balaam, I called thee to curse my enemies, and, behold, thou have altogether blessed them these three times.
Therefore now flee thou to thy place. I thought to promote thee to great honor, but, lo, Jehovah has kept thee back from honor.
And Balaam said to Balak, Did I not also speak to thy messengers that thou sent to me, saying,
If Balak would give me his house full of silver and gold, I cannot go beyond the word of Jehovah, to do either good or bad of my own mind. What Jehovah speaks, that I will speak?
And now, behold, I go to my people. Come, I will advise thee what this people shall do to thy people in the latter days.
And he took up his oracle, and said, Balaam the son of Beor says, and the man whose eye was closed says,
I see him, but not now. I behold him, but not near. There shall come forth a star out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite through the corners of Moab, and break down all the sons of tumult.
And Edom shall be a possession, Seir also shall be a possession, who were his enemies, while Israel does valiantly.
And out of Jacob shall come he who shall have dominion, and shall destroy the remnant from the city.
And he looked on Amalek, and took up his oracle, and said, Amalek was the first of the nations, but his latter end shall come to destruction.
And he looked on the Kenite, and took up his oracle, and said, Strong is thy dwelling-place, and thy nest is set in the rock.
Nevertheless Kain shall be wasted, until Asshur shall carry thee away captive.
And he took up his oracle, and said, Alas, who shall live when God does this?
But ships shall come from the coast of Kittim, and they shall afflict Asshur, and shall afflict Eber, and he also shall come to destruction.
And Balaam rose up, and went and returned to his place, and Balak also went his way.

And Israel abode in Shittim. And the people began to play the harlot with the daughters of Moab,
for they called the people to the sacrifices of their gods. And the people ate, and bowed down to their gods.
And Israel joined himself to Baal-peor, and the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Take all the chiefs of the people, and hang them up to Jehovah before the sun, that the fierce anger of Jehovah may turn away from Israel.
And Moses said to the judges of Israel, Kill ye every one his men who have joined themselves to Baal-peor.
And, behold, one of the sons of Israel came and brought to his brothers a Midianite woman in the sight of Moses, and in the sight of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, while they were weeping at the door of the tent of meeting.
And when Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, saw it, he rose up from the midst of the congregation, and took a spear in his hand.
And he went after the man of Israel into the tent, and thrust both of them through, the man of Israel, and the woman through her body. So the plague was stayed from the sons of Israel.
And those who died by the plague were twenty-four thousand.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, has turned my wrath away from the sons of Israel, in that he was jealous with my jealousy among them, so that I did not consume the sons of Israel in my jealousy.
Therefore say, Behold, I give to him my covenant of peace.
And it shall be to him, and to his seed after him, the covenant of an everlasting priesthood, because he was jealous for his God, and made atonement for the sons of Israel.
Now the name of the man of Israel who was slain, who was slain with the Midianite woman, was Zimri, the son of Salu, a ruler of a fathers' house among the Simeonites.
And the name of the Midianite woman who was slain was Cozbi, the daughter of Zur. He was head of the people of a fathers' house in Midian.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Vex the Midianites, and smite them,
for they vex you with their wiles, with which they have beguiled you in the matter of Peor, and in the matter of Cozbi, the daughter of the ruler of Midian, their sister, who was slain on the day of the plague in the matter of Peor.

And it came to pass after the plague, that Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest, saying,
Take the sum of all the congregation of the sons of Israel, from twenty years old and upward, by their fathers' houses, all who are able to go forth to war in Israel.
And Moses and Eleazar the priest spoke with them in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho
saying from twenty years old and upward, as Jehovah commanded Moses and the sons of Israel, who came forth out of the land of Egypt.
of Hanoch, the family of the Hanochites; of Pallu, the family of the Palluites;
of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Carmi, the family of the Carmites.
These are the families of the Reubenites. And those who were numbered of them were forty-three thousand and seven hundred and thirty.
Eliab.
Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram. These are that Dathan and Abiram, who were renown men of the congregation, who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah when they strove against Jehovah,
and the earth opened its mouth, and swallowed them up together with Korah when that company died, that time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men, and they became an example.
Notwithstanding, the sons of Korah did not die.)
of Nemuel, the family of the Nemuelites; of Jamin, the family of the Jaminites; of Jachin, the family of the Jachinites;
of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites; of Shaul, the family of the Shaulites.
These are the families of the Simeonites, twenty-two thousand and two hundred.
of Zephon, the family of the Zephonites; of Haggi, the family of the Haggites; of Shuni, the family of the Shunites;
of Ozni, the family of the Oznites; of Eri, the family of the Erites;
of Arod, the family of the Arodites; of Areli, the family of the Arelites.
These are the families of the sons of Gad according to those who were numbered of them, forty thousand and five hundred.
Er and Onan, and Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan.
of Shelah, the family of the Shelanites; of Perez, the family of the Perezites; of Zerah, the family of the Zerahites.
of Hezron, the family of the Hezronites; of Hamul, the family of the Hamulites.
These are the families of Judah according to those who were numbered of them, seventy-six thousand and five hundred.
of Tola, the family of the Tolaites; of Puvah, the family of the Punites;
of Jashub, the family of the Jashubites; of Shimron, the family of the Shimronites.
These are the families of Issachar according to those who were numbered of them, sixty-four thousand and three hundred.
of Sered, the family of the Seredites; of Elon, the family of the Elonites; of Jahleel, the family of the Jahleelites.
These are the families of the Zebulunites according to those who were numbered of them, sixty thousand and five hundred.
Manasseh and Ephraim.
of Machir, the family of the Machirites; and Machir begot Gilead; of Gilead, the family of the Gileadites.
of Iezer, the family of the Iezerites; of Helek, the family of the Helekites;
and of Asriel, the family of the Asrielites; and of Shechem, the family of the Shechemites;
and of Shemida, the family of the Shemidaites; and of Hepher, the family of the Hepherites.
And Zelophehad the son of Hepher had no sons, but daughters, and the names of the daughters of Zelophehad were Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
These are the families of Manasseh, and those who were numbered of them were fifty-two thousand and seven hundred.
of Shuthelah, the family of the Shuthelahites; of Becher, the family of the Becherites; of Tahan, the family of the Tahanites.
of Eran, the family of the Eranites.
These are the families of the sons of Ephraim according to those who were numbered of them, thirty-two thousand and five hundred. These are the sons of Joseph after their families.
of Bela, the family of the Belaites; of Ashbel, the family of the Ashbelites; of Ahiram, the family of the Ahiramites;
of Shephupham, the family of the Shuphamites; of Hupham, the family of the Huphamites.
of Ard, the family of the Ardites; of Naaman, the family of the Naamites.
These are the sons of Benjamin according to their families, and those who were numbered of them were forty-five thousand and six hundred.
of Shuham, the family of the Shuhamites. These are the families of Dan according to their families.
All the families of the Shuhamites, according to those who were numbered of them, were sixty-four thousand and four hundred.
of Imnah, the family of the Imnites; of Ishvi, the family of the Ishvites; of Beriah, the family of the Berites.
of Heber, the family of the Heberites; of Malchiel, the family of the Malchielites.
And the name of the daughter of Asher was Serah.
These are the families of the sons of Asher according to those who were numbered of them, fifty-three thousand and four hundred.
of Jahzeel, the family of the Jahzeelites; of Guni, the family of the Gunites;
of Jezer, the family of the Jezerites; of Shillem, the family of the Shillemites.
These are the families of Naphtali according to their families, and those who were numbered of them were forty-five thousand and four hundred.
These are those who were numbered of the sons of Israel, six hundred one thousand seven hundred and thirty.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
To these the land shall be divided for an inheritance according to the number of names.
to each one according to those who were numbered of him shall his inheritance be given.
Notwithstanding, the land shall be divided by lot. They shall inherit according to the names of the tribes of their fathers.
According to the lot their inheritance shall be divided between the many and the fewer.
of Gershon, the family of the Gershonites; of Kohath, the family of the Kohathites; of Merari, the family of the Merarites.
the family of the Libnites, the family of the Hebronites, the family of the Mahlites, the family of the Mushites, the family of the Korahites. And Kohath begot Amram.
And the name of Amram's wife was Jochebed, the daughter of Levi, who was born to Levi in Egypt. And she bore to Amram, Aaron and Moses, and Miriam their sister.
And to Aaron were born Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
And Nadab and Abihu died when they offered strange fire before Jehovah.
And those who were numbered of them were twenty-three thousand, every male from a month old and upward, for they were not numbered among the sons of Israel, because there was no inheritance given them among the sons of Israel.
These are those who were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
But among these there was not a man of them who was numbered by Moses and Aaron the priest, who numbered the sons of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai.
For Jehovah had said of them, They shall surely die in the wilderness. And there was not a man of them left, except Caleb the son of Jephunneh, and Joshua the son of Nun.

Mahlah, Noah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Tirzah.
And they stood before Moses, and before Eleazar the priest, and before the rulers and all the congregation, at the door of the tent of meeting, saying,
Our father died in the wilderness, and he was not among the company of those who gathered themselves together against Jehovah in the company of Korah, but he died in his own sin, and he had no sons.
Why should the name of our father be taken away from among his family, because he had no son? Give to us a possession among the brothers of our father.
And Moses brought their case before Jehovah.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
The daughters of Zelophehad speak right. Thou shall surely give them a possession of an inheritance among their father's brothers, and thou shall cause the inheritance of their father to pass to them.
And thou shall speak to the sons of Israel, saying, If a man dies, and has no son, then ye shall cause his inheritance to pass to his daughter.
And if he has no daughter, then ye shall give his inheritance to his brothers.
And if he has no brothers, then ye shall give his inheritance to his father's brothers.
And if his father has no brothers, then ye shall give his inheritance to his kinsman who is next to him of his family, and he shall possess it. And it shall be to the sons of Israel a statute and ordinance, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Get thee up onto this mountain of Abarim, and behold the land which I have given to the sons of Israel.
And when thou have seen it, thou also shall be gathered to thy people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered,
because ye rebelled against my word in the wilderness of Zin, in the strife of the congregation, to sanctify me at the waters before their eyes. (These are the waters of Meribah of Kadesh in the wilderness of Zin.)
And Moses spoke to Jehovah, saying,
Let Jehovah, the God of the spirits of all flesh, appoint a man over the congregation,
who may go out before them, and who may come in before them, and who may lead them out, and who may bring them in, that the congregation of Jehovah be not as sheep which have no shepherd.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit, and lay thy hand upon him,
and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation, and give him a charge in their sight.
And thou shall put of thine honor upon him, that all the congregation of the sons of Israel may obey.
And he shall stand before Eleazar the priest, who shall inquire for him by the judgment of the Urim before Jehovah. At his word shall they go out, and at his word they shall come in, both he, and all the sons of Israel with him, even all the congregation.
And Moses did as Jehovah commanded him. And he took Joshua, and set him before Eleazar the priest, and before all the congregation.
And he laid his hands upon him, and gave him a charge, as Jehovah spoke by Moses.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Command the sons of Israel, and say to them, My oblation, my food for my offerings made by fire, of a sweet savor to me, ye shall observe to offer to me in their due season.
he-lambs a year old without blemish, two day by day, for a continual burnt offering.
The one lamb thou shall offer in the morning, and the other lamb thou shall offer at evening,
and the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with the fourth part of a hin of beaten oil.
It is a continual burnt offering, which was ordained on mount Sinai for a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And the drink offering of it shall be the fourth part of a hin for the one lamb. In the holy place thou shall pour out a drink offering of strong drink to Jehovah.
And the other lamb thou shall offer at evening. As the meal offering of the morning, and as the drink offering of it, thou shall offer it, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah.
And on the sabbath day two he-lambs a year old without blemish, and two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil, and the drink offering of it.
This is the burnt offering of every sabbath, besides the continual burnt offering, and the drink offering of it.
two young bullocks, and one ram, seven he-lambs a year old without blemish,
and three tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil for each bullock, and two tenth parts of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled with oil for the one ram,
and a tenth part of fine flour mingled with oil for a meal offering to every lamb, for a burnt offering of a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And their drink offerings shall be half a hin of wine for a bullock, and the third part of a hin for the ram, and the fourth part of a hin for a lamb. This is the burnt offering of every month throughout the months of the year.
And one he-goat for a sin offering to Jehovah, it shall be offered besides the continual burnt offering, and the drink offering of it.
And in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, is Jehovah's Passover.
And on the fifteenth day of this month shall be a feast; seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten.
In the first day shall be a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
two young bullocks, and one ram, and seven he-lambs a year old (they shall be to you without blemish),
and their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil. Three tenth parts ye shall offer for a bullock, and two tenth parts for the ram,
a tenth part shall thou offer for every lamb of the seven lambs.
Also one he-goat for a sin offering, to make atonement for you.
Ye shall offer these besides the burnt offering of the morning, which is for a continual burnt offering.
After this manner ye shall offer daily, for seven days, the food of the offering made by fire, of a sweet savor to Jehovah. It shall be offered besides the continual burnt offering, and the drink offering of it.
And on the seventh day ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
Also in the day of the first-fruits, when ye offer a new meal offering to Jehovah in your feast of weeks, ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work.
two young bullocks, one ram, seven he-lambs a year old,
and their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for each bullock, two tenth parts for the one ram,
a tenth part for every lamb of the seven lambs,
one he-goat, to make atonement for you.
Besides the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, ye shall offer them (they shall be to you without blemish), and their drink offerings.

And in the seventh month, on the first day of the month, ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work. It is a day of blowing of trumpets to you.
one young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs a year old without blemish,
and their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, two tenth parts for the ram,
and one tenth part for every lamb of the seven lambs,
and one he-goat for a sin offering, to make atonement for you,
besides the burnt offering of the new moon, and the meal offering of it, and the continual burnt offering and the meal offering of it, and their drink offerings, according to their ordinance, for a sweet savor, an offering made by fire to Jehovah.
And on the tenth day of this seventh month ye shall have a holy convocation, and ye shall afflict your souls. Ye shall do no manner of work.
one young bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs a year old (they shall be to you without blemish),
and their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for the bullock, two tenth parts for the one ram,
a tenth part for every lamb of the seven lambs,
one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the sin offering of atonement, and the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, and their drink offerings.
And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have a holy convocation. Ye shall do no job work, and ye shall keep a feast to Jehovah seven days.
thirteen young bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old (they shall be without blemish),
and their meal offering, fine flour mingled with oil, three tenth parts for every bullock of the thirteen bullocks, two tenth parts for each ram of the two rams,
and a tenth part for every lamb of the fourteen lambs,
and one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it, and the drink offering of it.
And on the second day, twelve young bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
and their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
and one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, and their drink offerings.
And on the third day, eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
and their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
and one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, and the drink offering of it.
And on the fourth day, ten bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
and one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it, and the drink offering of it.
And on the fifth day, nine bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
and their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
and one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, and the drink offering of it.
And on the sixth day, eight bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
and their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
and one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it, and the drink offerings of it.
And on the seventh day, seven bullocks, two rams, fourteen he-lambs a year old without blemish,
and their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullocks, for the rams, and for the lambs, according to their number, after the ordinance,
and one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, the meal offering of it, and the drink offering of it.
On the eighth day, ye shall have a solemn assembly. Ye shall do no job work.
one bullock, one ram, seven he-lambs a year old without blemish,
their meal offering and their drink offerings for the bullock, for the ram, and for the lambs, shall be according to their number, after the ordinance,
and one he-goat for a sin offering, besides the continual burnt offering, and the meal offering of it, and the drink offering of it.
These ye shall offer to Jehovah in your set feasts, besides your vows, and your freewill offerings, for your burnt offerings, and for your meal offerings, and for your drink offerings, and for your peace offerings.
And Moses told the sons of Israel according to all that Jehovah commanded Moses.

And Moses spoke to the heads of the tribes of the sons of Israel, saying, This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded.
When a man vows a vow to Jehovah, or swears an oath to bind his soul with a bond, he shall not break his word. He shall do according to all that proceeds out of his mouth.
Also when a woman vows a vow to Jehovah, and binds herself by a bond, being in her father's house, in her youth,
and her father hears her vow, and her bond with which she has bound her soul, and her father remains silent at her, then all her vows shall stand, and every bond with which she has bound her soul shall stand.
But if her father disallows her in the day that he hears, none of her vows, or of her bonds with which she has bound her soul, shall stand. And Jehovah will forgive her, because her father disallowed her.
And if she is married to a husband, while her vows are upon her, or the rash utterance of her lips, with which she has bound her soul,
and her husband hears it, and remains silent at her in the day that he hears it, then her vows shall stand, and her bonds with which she has bound her soul shall stand.
But if her husband disallows her in the day that he hears it, then he shall make void her vow which is upon her, and the rash utterance of her lips, with which she has bound her soul. And Jehovah will forgive her.
But the vow of a widow, or of her who is divorced, even everything with which she has bound her soul shall stand against her.
And if she vowed in her husband's house, or bound her soul by a bond with an oath,
and her husband heard it, and remained silent at her, and did not disallow her, then all her vows shall stand, and every bond with which she bound her soul shall stand.
But if her husband made them null and void in the day that he heard them, then whatever proceeded out of her lips concerning her vows, or concerning the bond of her soul, shall not stand. Her husband has made them void, and Jehovah will forgive her.
Every vow, and every binding oath to afflict the soul, her husband may establish it, or her husband may make it void.
But if her husband altogether remains silent at her from day to day, then he establishes all her vows, or all her bonds, which are upon her. He has established them, because he remained silent at her in the day that he heard them.
But if he shall make them null and void after he has heard them, then he shall bear her iniquity.
These are the statutes, which Jehovah commanded Moses, between a man and his wife, between a father and his daughter, being in her youth in her father's house.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Avenge the sons of Israel of the Midianites. Afterward thou shall be gathered to thy people.
And Moses spoke to the people, saying, Arm ye men from among you for the war, that they may go against Midian, to execute Jehovah's vengeance on Midian.
From every tribe a thousand, throughout all the tribes of Israel, ye shall send to the war.
So there were delivered, out of the thousands of Israel, a thousand of every tribe, twelve thousand armed for war.
And Moses sent them, a thousand of every tribe, to the war, them and Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, to the war, with the vessels of the sanctuary and the trumpets for the alarm in his hand.
And they warred against Midian as Jehovah commanded Moses, and they killed every male.
Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the five kings of Midian. They also killed Balaam the son of Beor with the sword.
And the sons of Israel took captive the women of Midian and their little ones. And all their cattle, and all their flocks, and all their goods, they took for a prey.
And all their cities in the places in which they dwelt, and all their encampments, they burnt with fire.
And they took all the spoil, and all the prey, both of man and of beast.
And they brought the captives, and the prey, and the spoil, to Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and to the congregation of the sons of Israel, to the camp at the plains of Moab, which are by the Jordan at Jericho.
And Moses, and Eleazar the priest, and all the rulers of the congregation, went forth to meet them outside the camp.
And Moses was angry with the officers of the army, the captains of thousands and the captains of hundreds, who came from the service of the war.
And Moses said to them, Have ye saved all the women alive?
Behold, these caused the sons of Israel, through the counsel of Balaam, to commit trespass against Jehovah in the matter of Peor, and so the plague was among the congregation of Jehovah.
Now therefore kill every male among the little ones, and kill every woman that has known man by lying with him.
But all the women-children, who have not known man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.
And encamp ye outside the camp seven days. Whoever has killed any person, and whoever has touched any slain, purify yourselves on the third day and on the seventh day, ye and your captives.
And as to every garment, and all that is made of skin, and all work of goats' hair, and all things made of wood, ye shall purify yourselves.
only the gold, and the silver, the brass, the iron, the tin, and the lead-
everything which may go into fire-ye shall make to go through the fire, and it shall be clean. Nevertheless it shall be purified with the water for impurity. And all that may not go into fire ye shall make to go through the water.
And ye shall wash your clothes on the seventh day, and ye shall be clean, and afterward ye shall come into the camp.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Take the sum of the prey that was taken, both of man and of beast, thou, and Eleazar the priest, and the heads of the fathers of the congregation,
between the men skilled in war who went out to battle, and all the congregation.
one soul of five hundred, both of the persons, and of the oxen, and of the donkeys, and of the flocks.
Take it of their half, and give it to Eleazar the priest, for Jehovah's heave offering.
And of the sons of Israel's half, thou shall take one drawn out of every fifty, of the persons, of the oxen, of the donkeys, and of the flocks, even of all the cattle, and give them to the Levites, who keep the charge of the tabernacle of Jehovah.
And Moses and Eleazar the priest did as Jehovah commanded Moses.
Now the prey, over and above the booty which the men of war took, was six hundred seventy-five thousand sheep,
and seventy-two thousand oxen,
and sixty-one thousand donkeys,
and thirty-two thousand persons in all, of the women who had not known man by lying with him.
And the half, which was the portion of those who went out to war, was in number three hundred thirty-seven thousand and five hundred sheep.
And Jehovah's tribute of the sheep was six hundred and seventy-five.
And the oxen were thirty-six thousand, of which Jehovah's tribute was seventy-two.
And the donkeys were thirty thousand and five hundred, of which Jehovah's tribute was sixty-one.
And the persons were sixteen thousand, of whom Jehovah's tribute was thirty-two persons.
And Moses gave the tribute, which was Jehovah's heave offering, to Eleazar the priest, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And of the sons of Israel's half, which Moses divided off from the men who warred
(now the congregation's half was three hundred thirty-seven thousand and five hundred sheep,
and thirty-six thousand oxen,
and thirty thousand and five hundred donkeys,
and sixteen thousand persons),
even of the sons of Israel's half, Moses took one drawn out of every fifty, both of man and of beast, and gave them to the Levites, who kept the charge of the tabernacle of Jehovah, as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And the officers who were over the thousands of the army, the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, came near to Moses.
And they said to Moses, Thy servants have taken the sum of the men of war that are under our charge, and there lacks not one man of us.
And we have brought Jehovah's oblation, what every man has gotten, of jewels of gold, ankle-chains, and bracelets, signet-rings, earrings, and armlets, to make atonement for our souls before Jehovah.
And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold from them, even all wrought jewels.
And all the gold of the heave offering that they offered up to Jehovah, of the captains of thousands, and of the captains of hundreds, was sixteen thousand seven hundred and fifty shekels.
(For the men of war had taken booty, every man for himself.)
And Moses and Eleazar the priest took the gold of the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and brought it into the tent of meeting, for a memorial for the sons of Israel before Jehovah.

Now the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad had a very great multitude of cattle. And when they saw the land of Jazer, and the land of Gilead, that, behold, the place was a place for cattle,
the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben came and spoke to Moses, and to Eleazar the priest, and to the rulers of the congregation, saying,
Ataroth, and Dibon, and Jazer, and Nimrah, and Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Sebam, and Nebo, and Beon,
the land which Jehovah smote before the congregation of Israel, is a land for cattle, and thy servants have cattle.
And they said, If we have found favor in thy sight, let this land be given to thy servants for a possession. Bring us not over the Jordan.
And Moses said to the sons of Gad, and to the sons of Reuben, Shall your brothers go to the war, and shall ye sit here?
And why do ye discourage the heart of the sons of Israel from going over into the land which Jehovah has given them?
Thus did your fathers when I sent them from Kadesh-barnea to see the land.
For when they went up to the valley of Eshcol, and saw the land, they discouraged the heart of the sons of Israel, that they should not go into the land which Jehovah had given them.
And Jehovah's anger was kindled in that day, and he swore, saying,
Surely none of the men who came up out of Egypt, from twenty years old and upward, shall see the land which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; because they have not wholly followed me,
except Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite, and Joshua the son of Nun, because they have wholly followed Jehovah.
And Jehovah's anger was kindled against Israel, and he made them wander to and fro in the wilderness forty years, until all the generation that had done evil in the sight of Jehovah was consumed.
And, behold, ye are risen up in your fathers' stead, an increase of sinful men, to augment yet the fierce anger of Jehovah toward Israel.
For if ye turn away from after him, he will yet again leave them in the wilderness, and ye will destroy all this people.
And they came near to him, and said, We will build sheepfolds here for our cattle, and cities for our little ones,
but we ourselves will be ready armed to go before the sons of Israel, until we have brought them to their place. And our little ones shall dwell in the fortified cities because of the inhabitants of the land.
We will not return to our houses until the sons of Israel have inherited every man his inheritance.
For we will not inherit with them on the other side of the Jordan, and forward, because our inheritance is fallen to us on this side of the Jordan eastward.
And Moses said to them, If ye will do this thing, if ye will arm yourselves to go before Jehovah to the war,
and every armed man of you will pass over the Jordan before Jehovah, until he has driven out his enemies from before him,
and the land is subdued before Jehovah, then afterward ye shall return, and be guiltless towards Jehovah, and towards Israel, and this land shall be to you for a possession before Jehovah.
But if ye will not do so, behold, ye have sinned against Jehovah, and be sure your sin will find you out.
Build for you cities for your little ones, and folds for your sheep, and do that which has proceeded out of your mouth.
And the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben spoke to Moses, saying, Thy servants will do as my lord commands.
Our little ones, our wives, our flocks, and all our cattle, shall be there in the cities of Gilead,
but thy servants will pass over, every man who is armed for war, before Jehovah to battle, as my lord says.
So Moses gave charge concerning them to Eleazar the priest, and to Joshua the son of Nun, and to the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel.
And Moses said to them, If the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben will pass with you over the Jordan, every man that is armed to battle, before Jehovah, and the land shall be subdued before you, then ye shall give them the land of Gilead for a possession,
but if they will not pass over with you armed, they shall have possessions among you in the land of Canaan.
And the sons of Gad and the sons of Reuben answered, saying, As Jehovah has said to thy servants, so we will do.
We will pass over armed before Jehovah into the land of Canaan, and the possession of our inheritance is with us beyond the Jordan.
And Moses gave to them, even to the sons of Gad, and to the sons of Reuben, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh the son of Joseph, the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites, and the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, the land, according to the cities of it with their borders, even the cities of the land round about.
And the sons of Gad built Dibon, and Ataroth, and Aroer,
and Atrothshophan, and Jazer, and Jogbehah,
fortified cities, and folds for sheep.
And the sons of Reuben built Heshbon, and Elealeh, and Kiriathaim,
and Nebo, and Baal-meon, (their names being changed,) and Sibmah. And they gave other names to the cities which they built.
And the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh went to Gilead, and took it, and dispossessed the Amorites that were in it.
And Moses gave Gilead to Machir the son of Manasseh, and he dwelt in it.
And Jair the son of Manasseh went and took the towns of it, and called them Havvoth-jair.
And Nobah went and took Kenath, and the villages of it, and called it Nobah, after his own name.

These are the journeys of the sons of Israel when they went forth out of the land of Egypt by their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron.
And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by the commandment of Jehovah. And these are their journeys according to their goings out.
And they journeyed from Rameses in the first month, on the fifteenth day of the first month. On the morrow after the Passover the sons of Israel went out with a high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians,
while the Egyptians were burying all their firstborn whom Jehovah had smitten among them; upon their gods also Jehovah executed judgments.
And the sons of Israel journeyed from Rameses, and encamped in Succoth.
And they journeyed from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, which is in the edge of the wilderness.
And they journeyed from Etham, and turned back to Pihahiroth, which is before Baal-zephon, and they encamped before Migdol.
And they journeyed from before Hahiroth, and passed through the midst of the sea into the wilderness. And they went three days' journey in the wilderness of Etham, and encamped in Marah.
And they journeyed from Marah, and came to Elim. And in Elim were twelve springs of water, and seventy palm trees, and they encamped there.
And they journeyed from Elim, and encamped by the Red Sea.
And they journeyed from the Red Sea, and encamped in the wilderness of Sin.
And they journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, and encamped in Dophkah.
And they journeyed from Dophkah, and encamped in Alush.
And they journeyed from Alush, and encamped in Rephidim, where was no water for the people to drink.
And they journeyed from Rephidim, and encamped in the wilderness of Sinai.
And they journeyed from the wilderness of Sinai, and encamped in Kibroth-hattaavah.
And they journeyed from Kibroth-hattaavah, and encamped in Hazeroth.
And they journeyed from Hazeroth, and encamped in Rithmah.
And they journeyed from Rithmah, and encamped in Rimmon-perez.
And they journeyed from Rimmon-perez, and encamped in Libnah.
And they journeyed from Libnah, and encamped in Rissah.
And they journeyed from Rissah, and encamped in Kehelathah.
And they journeyed from Kehelathah, and encamped in mount Shepher.
And they journeyed from mount Shepher, and encamped in Haradah.
And they journeyed from Haradah, and encamped in Makheloth.
And they journeyed from Makheloth, and encamped in Tahath.
And they journeyed from Tahath, and encamped in Terah.
And they journeyed from Terah, and encamped in Mithkah.
And they journeyed from Mithkah, and encamped in Hashmonah.
And they journeyed from Hashmonah, and encamped in Moseroth.
And they journeyed from Moseroth, and encamped in Bene-jaakan.
And they journeyed from Bene-jaakan, and encamped in Hor-haggidgad.
And they journeyed from Hor-haggidgad, and encamped in Jotbathah.
And they journeyed from Jotbathah, and encamped in Abronah.
And they journeyed from Abronah, and encamped in Ezion-geber.
And they journeyed from Ezion-geber, and encamped in the wilderness of Zin (the same is Kadesh).
And they journeyed from Kadesh, and encamped at mount Hor, in the edge of the land of Edom.
(And Aaron the priest went up onto mount Hor at the commandment of Jehovah, and died there, in the fortieth year after the sons of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fifth month, on the first day of the month.
And Aaron was a hundred and twenty-three years old when he died in mount Hor.
And the Canaanite, the king of Arad, who dwelt in the South in the land of Canaan, heard of the coming of the sons of Israel.)
And they journeyed from mount Hor, and encamped in Zalmonah.
And they journeyed from Zalmonah, and encamped in Punon.
And they journeyed from Punon, and encamped in Oboth.
And they journeyed from Oboth, and encamped in Iye-abarim, in the border of Moab.
And they journeyed from Iyim, and encamped in Dibon-gad.
And they journeyed from Dibon-gad, and encamped in Almon-diblathaim.
And they journeyed from Almon-diblathaim, and encamped in the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo.
And they journeyed from the mountains of Abarim, and encamped in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.
And they encamped by the Jordan, from Beth-jeshimoth even to Abel-shittim in the plains of Moab.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When ye pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
then ye shall drive out all the inhabitants of the land from before you, and destroy all their figured stones, and destroy all their molten images, and demolish all their high places.
And ye shall take possession of the land, and dwell in it, for to you I have given the land to possess it.
And ye shall inherit the land by lot according to your families. To the more ye shall give more inheritance, and to the few thou shall give less inheritance. Wherever the lot falls to any man, that shall be his. Ye shall inherit according to the tribes of your fathers.
But if ye will not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you, then those that ye let remain of them shall be as pricks in your eyes, and as thorns in your sides, and they shall vex you in the land in which ye dwell.
And it shall come to pass, that, as I thought to do to them, so I will do to you.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Command the sons of Israel, and say to them, When ye come into the land of Canaan (this is the land that shall fall to you for an inheritance, even the land of Canaan according to the borders of it),
then your south quarter shall be from the wilderness of Zin along by the side of Edom. And your south border shall be from the end of the Salt Sea eastward.
And your border shall turn about southward of the ascent of Akrabbim, and pass along to Zin. And the goings out of it shall be southward of Kadesh-barnea. And it shall go forth to Hazar-addar, and pass along to Azmon.
And the border shall turn about from Azmon to the brook of Egypt, and the goings out of it shall be at the sea.
And for the western border, ye shall have the great sea and the border of it. This shall be your west border.
From the great sea ye shall mark out for you mount Hor.
From mount Hor ye shall mark out to the entrance of Hamath. And the goings out of the border shall be at Zedad.
And the border shall go forth to Ziphron, and the goings out of it shall be at Hazar-enan. This shall be your north border.
And ye shall mark out your east border from Hazar-enan to Shepham.
And the border shall go down from Shepham to Riblah, on the east side of Ain. And the border shall go down, and shall reach to the side of the sea of Chinnereth eastward.
And the border shall go down to the Jordan, and the goings out of it shall be at the Salt Sea. This shall be your land according to the borders of it round about.
And Moses commanded the sons of Israel, saying, This is the land which ye shall inherit by lot, which Jehovah has commanded to give to the nine tribes, and to the half-tribe.
For the tribe of the sons of Reuben according to their fathers' houses, and the tribe of the children of Gad according to their fathers' houses, have received, and the half-tribe of Manasseh have received, their inheritance.
The two tribes and the half-tribe have received their inheritance beyond the Jordan at Jericho eastward, toward the sunrise.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun.
And ye shall take one ruler of every tribe, to divide the land for inheritance.
Of the tribe of Judah, Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
And of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, Shemuel the son of Ammihud.
Of the tribe of Benjamin, Elidad the son of Chislon.
And of the tribe of the sons of Dan a ruler, Bukki the son of Jogli.
of the tribe of the sons of Manasseh a ruler, Hanniel the son of Ephod,
and of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim a ruler, Kemuel the son of Shiphtan.
And of the tribe of the sons of Zebulun a ruler, Elizaphan the son of Parnach.
And of the tribe of the sons of Issachar a ruler, Paltiel the son of Azzan.
And of the tribe of the sons of Asher a ruler, Ahihud the son of Shelomi.
And of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali a ruler, Pedahel the son of Ammihud.
These are those whom Jehovah commanded to divide the inheritance to the sons of Israel in the land of Canaan.

And Jehovah spoke to Moses in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho, saying,
Command the sons of Israel, that they give to the Levites from the inheritance of their possession cities to dwell in. And ye shall give suburbs for the cities round about them to the Levites.
And they shall have the cities to dwell in, and their suburbs shall be for their cattle, and for their substance, and for all their beasts.
And the suburbs of the cities, which ye shall give to the Levites, shall be from the wall of the city and outward a thousand cubits round about.
And ye shall measure outside the city for the east side two thousand cubits, and for the south side two thousand cubits, and for the west side two thousand cubits, and for the north side two thousand cubits, the city being in the midst. This shall be to them the suburbs of the cities.
And of the cities which ye shall give to the Levites, there shall be the six cities of refuge, which ye shall give for the manslayer to flee to. And besides them ye shall give forty-two cities.
All the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty-eight cities, them with their suburbs.
And concerning the cities which ye shall give of the possession of the sons of Israel, from the many ye shall take many, and from the few ye shall take few. Everyone according to his inheritance which he inherits shall give of his cities to the Levites.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, and say to them, When ye pass over the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
then ye shall appoint cities to be cities of refuge for you, that the manslayer who kills any person unwittingly may flee there.
And the cities shall be to you for refuge from the avenger, that the manslayer not die until he stands before the congregation for judgment.
And the cities which ye shall give shall be for you six cities of refuge.
Ye shall give three cities beyond the Jordan, and three cities ye shall give in the land of Canaan. They shall be cities of refuge.
For the sons of Israel, and for the stranger and for the sojourner among them, these six cities shall be for refuge, that everyone who kills any person unwittingly may flee there.
But if he smote him with an instrument of iron, so that he died, he is a murderer. The murderer shall surely be put to death.
And if he smote him with a stone in the hand, by which a man may die, and he died, he is a murderer. The murderer shall surely be put to death.
Or if he smote him with a weapon of wood in the hand, by which a man may die, and he died, he is a murderer. The murderer shall surely be put to death.
The avenger of blood shall himself put the murderer to death. When he meets him, he shall put him to death.
And if he thrust him from hatred, or hurled at him, lying in wait, so that he died,
or in enmity smote him with his hand, so that he died, he who smote him shall surely be put to death. He is a murderer. The avenger of blood shall put the murderer to death, when he meets him.
But if he thrust him suddenly without enmity, or hurled upon him anything without lying in wait,
or with any stone, by which a man may die, not seeing him, and cast it upon him, so that he died, and he was not his enemy, nor sought his harm,
then the congregation shall judge between the smiter and the avenger of blood according to these ordinances.
And the congregation shall deliver the manslayer out of the hand of the avenger of blood, and the congregation shall restore him to his city of refuge where he fled. And he shall dwell in it until the death of the high priest, who was anointed with the holy oil.
But if the manslayer shall at any time go beyond the border of his city of refuge where he flees,
and the avenger of blood find him outside the border of his city of refuge, and the avenger of blood kills the manslayer, he shall not be guilty of blood,
because he should have remained in his city of refuge until the death of the high priest. But after the death of the high priest the manslayer shall return into the land of his possession.
And these things shall be for a statute and ordinance to you throughout your generations in all your dwellings.
Whoever kills any person, the murderer shall be slain at the mouth of witnesses, but one witness shall not testify against any person so that he dies.
Moreover ye shall take no ransom for the life of a murderer who is guilty of death, but he shall surely be put to death.
And ye shall take no ransom for him who has fled to his city of refuge, that he may come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the priest.
So ye shall not pollute the land in which ye are, for blood, it pollutes the land. And no expiation can be made for the land for the blood that is shed in it, but by the blood of him who shed it.
And thou shall not defile the land which ye inhabit, in the midst of which I dwell, for I, Jehovah, dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel.

And the heads of the fathers of the family of the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh, of the families of the sons of Joseph, came near, and spoke before Moses, and before the rulers, the heads of the fathers of the sons of Israel.
And they said, Jehovah commanded my lord to give the land for inheritance by lot to the sons of Israel. And my lord was commanded by Jehovah to give the inheritance of Zelophehad our brother to his daughters.
And if they be married to any of the sons of the other tribes of the sons of Israel, then their inheritance will be taken away from the inheritance of our fathers, and will be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they shall belong. So it will be taken away from the lot of our inheritance.
And when the jubilee of the sons of Israel shall be, then their inheritance will be added to the inheritance of the tribe to which they shall belong. So their inheritance will be taken away from the inheritance of the tribe of our fathers.
And Moses commanded the sons of Israel according to the word of Jehovah, saying, The tribe of the sons of Joseph speak right.
This is the thing which Jehovah commands concerning the daughters of Zelophehad, saying, Let them be married to whom they think best, only into the family of the tribe of their father shall they be married.
So no inheritance of the sons of Israel shall remove from tribe to tribe, for the sons of Israel shall cling each one to the inheritance of the tribe of his fathers.
And every daughter, who possesses an inheritance in any tribe of the sons of Israel, shall be wife to one of the family of the tribe of her father, that the sons of Israel may possess every man the inheritance of his fathers.
So no inheritance shall move from one tribe to another tribe, for the tribes of the sons of Israel shall cling each one to his own inheritance.
Even as Jehovah commanded Moses, so did the daughters of Zelophehad,
for Mahlah, Tirzah, and Hoglah, and Milcah, and Noah, the daughters of Zelophedad, were married to their father's brothers' sons.
They were married into the families of the sons of Manasseh the son of Joseph, and their inheritance remained in the tribe of the family of their father.
These are the commandments and the ordinances which Jehovah commanded by Moses to the sons of Israel in the plains of Moab by the Jordan at Jericho.

Deuteronomy

These are the words which Moses spoke to all Israel beyond the Jordan in the wilderness, in the Arabah opposite Suph, between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Di-zahab.
It is eleven days journey from Horeb by the way of mount Seir to Kadesh-barnea.
And it came to pass in the fortieth year, in the eleventh month, on the first day of the month, that Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, according to all that Jehovah had given him in commandment to them,
after he had smitten Sihon the king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, who dwelt in Ashtaroth, at Edrei.
Beyond the Jordan, in the land of Moab, Moses began to declare this law, saying,
Jehovah our God spoke to us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough at this mountain.
Turn, and take your journey, and go to the hill-country of the Amorites, and to all the places near thereto, in the Arabah, in the hill-country, and in the lowland, and in the South, and by the sea-shore, the land of the Canaanites, and Lebanon, as far as the great river, the river Euphrates.
Behold, I have set the land before you. Go in and possess the land which Jehovah swore to your fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give to them and to their seed after them.
And I spoke to you at that time, saying, I am not able to bear you myself alone.
Jehovah your God has multiplied you, and, behold, ye are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.
Jehovah, the God of your fathers, make you a thousand times as many as ye are, and bless you, as he has promised you!
How can I myself alone bear your encumbrance, and your burden, and your strife?
Take for you wise men, and understanding, and known, according to your tribes, and I will make them heads over you.
And ye answered me, and said, The thing which thou have spoken is good to do.
So I took the heads of your tribes, wise men, and known, and made them heads over you, captains of thousands, and captains of hundreds, and captains of fifties, and captains of tens, and officers, according to your tribes.
And I charged your judges at that time, saying, Hear between your brothers, and judge righteously between a man and his brother, and the sojourner who is with him.
Ye shall not respect persons in judgment. Ye shall hear the small and the great alike. Ye shall not be afraid of the face of man, for the judgment is God's. And the case that is too hard for you ye shall bring to me, and I will hear it.
And I commanded you at that time all the things which ye should do.
And we journeyed from Horeb, and went through all that great and terrible wilderness which ye saw, by the way to the hill-country of the Amorites, as Jehovah our God commanded us, and we came to Kadesh-barnea.
And I said to you, Ye have come to the hill-country of the Amorites, which Jehovah our God gives to us.
Behold, Jehovah thy God has set the land before thee. Go up, take possession, as Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, has spoken to thee. Fear not, neither be dismayed.
And ye came near to me, all of you, and said, Let us send men before us, that they may search the land for us, and bring us word again of the way by which we must go up, and the cities to which we shall come.
And the thing pleased me well. And I took twelve men of you, one man for every tribe.
And they turned and went up into the hill-country, and came to the valley of Eshcol, and spied it out.
And they took of the fruit of the land in their hands, and brought it down to us, and brought us word again, and said, It is a good land which Jehovah our God gives to us.
Yet ye would not go up, but rebelled against the commandment of Jehovah your God.
And ye murmured in your tents, and said, Because Jehovah hated us, he has brought us forth out of the land of Egypt, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to destroy us.
Where are we going up? Our brothers have made our heart to melt, saying, The people are greater and taller than we. The cities are great and fortified up to heaven, and moreover we have seen the sons of the Anakim there.
Then I said to you, Dread not, neither be afraid of them.
Jehovah your God who goes before you, he will fight for you, according to all that he did for you in Egypt before your eyes,
and in the wilderness, where thou have seen how that Jehovah thy God bore thee, as a man bears his son, in all the way that ye went, until ye came to this place.
Yet in this thing ye did not believe Jehovah your God,
who went before you in the way, to seek out a place for you to pitch your tents in, in fire by night, to show you by what way ye should go, and in the cloud by day.
And Jehovah heard the voice of your words, and was angry, and swore, saying,
Surely there shall not one of these men of this evil generation see the good land, which I swore to give to your fathers,
except Caleb the son of Jephunneh. He shall see it, and I will give to him the land that he has trodden upon, and to his sons, because he has wholly followed Jehovah.
Also Jehovah was angry with me for your sakes, saying, Thou also shall not go in there.
Joshua the son of Nun, who stands before thee, he shall go in there. Encourage thou him, for he shall cause Israel to inherit it.
Moreover your little ones, who ye said would be a prey, and your sons, who this day have no knowledge of good or evil, they shall go in there, and I will give it to them, and they shall possess it.
But as for you, turn, and take your journey into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea.
Then ye answered and said to me, We have sinned against Jehovah, we will go up and fight according to all that Jehovah our God commanded us. And ye girded on every man his weapons of war, and were forward to go up into the hill-country.
And Jehovah said to me, Say to them, Do not go up, neither fight, for I am not among you, lest ye be smitten before your enemies.
So I spoke to you, and ye did not hearken, but ye rebelled against the commandment of Jehovah, and were presumptuous, and went up into the hill-country.
And the Amorites, who dwelt in that hill-country, came out against you, and chased you, as bees do, and beat you down in Seir, even to Hormah.
And ye returned and wept before Jehovah, but Jehovah did not hearken to your voice, nor gave ear to you.
So ye abode in Kadesh many days, according to the days that ye abode there.

Then we turned, and took our journey into the wilderness by the way to the Red Sea, as Jehovah spoke to me. And we encompassed mount Seir many days.
And Jehovah spoke to me, saying,
Ye have encompassed this mountain long enough, turn northward.
And command thou the people, saying, Ye are to pass through the border of your brothers the sons of Esau, who dwell in Seir, and they will be afraid of you. Take ye good heed to yourselves therefore.
Do not contend with them, for I will not give you of their land, no, not so much as for the sole of the foot to tread on, because I have given mount Seir to Esau for a possession.
Ye shall purchase food from them for money, that ye may eat, and ye shall also buy water from them for money, that ye may drink.
For Jehovah thy God has blessed thee in all the work of thy hand. He has known thy walking through this great wilderness. These forty years Jehovah thy God has been with thee; thou have lacked nothing.
So we passed by from our brothers the sons of Esau, who dwell in Seir, from the way of the Arabah from Elath and from Ezion-geber. And we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab.
And Jehovah said to me, Do not vex Moab, neither contend with them in battle, for I will not give thee of his land for a possession, because I have given Ar to the sons of Lot for a possession.
(The Emim dwelt in it formerly, a people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakim.
These also are accounted Rephaim, as the Anakim, but the Moabites call them Emim.
The Horites also dwelt in Seir formerly, but the sons of Esau succeeded them. And they destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their stead, as Israel did to the land of his possession, which Jehovah gave to them.)
Now rise up, and get you over the brook Zered. And we went over the brook Zered.
And the days in which we came from Kadesh-barnea, until we came over the brook Zered, were thirty-eight years; until all the generation of the men of war were consumed from the midst of the camp, as Jehovah swore to them.
Moreover the hand of Jehovah was against them, to destroy them from the midst of the camp, until they were consumed.
So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed and dead from among the people,
that Jehovah spoke to me, saying,
Thou are this day to pass over Ar, the border of Moab.
And when thou come near opposite the sons of Ammon, do not vex them, nor contend with them, for I will not give thee of the land of the sons of Ammon for a possession, because I have given it to the sons of Lot for a possession.
(That also is accounted a land of Rephaim. Rephaim dwelt in it formerly, but the Ammonites call them Zamzummim,
a people great, and many, and tall, as the Anakim. But Jehovah destroyed them before them, and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead,
as he did for the sons of Esau, who dwell in Seir, when he destroyed the Horites from before them. And they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead even to this day.
And the Avvim, who dwelt in villages as far as Gaza, the Caphtorim, who came forth out of Caphtor, destroyed them, and dwelt in their stead.)
Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the valley of the Arnon. Behold, I have given into thy hand Sihon the Amorite, king of Heshbon, and his land. Begin to possess it, and contend with him in battle.
This day I will begin to put the dread of thee and the fear of thee upon the peoples who are under the whole heaven, who shall hear the report of thee, and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee.
And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth to Sihon king of Heshbon with words of peace, saying,
Let me pass through thy land. I will go along by the highway, I will turn neither to the right hand nor to the left.
Thou shall sell me food for money, that I may eat, and give me water for money, that I may drink. Only let me pass through on my feet,
as the sons of Esau who dwell in Seir, and the Moabites who dwell in Ar, did to me, until I shall pass over the Jordan into the land which Jehovah our God gives us.
But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him, for Jehovah thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand, as at this day.
And Jehovah said to me, Behold, I have begun to deliver up Sihon and his land before thee. Begin to possess, that thou may inherit his land.
Then Sihon came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Jahaz.
And Jehovah our God delivered him up before us. And we smote him, and his sons, and all his people.
And we took all his cities at that time, and utterly destroyed every inhabited city, with the women and the little ones; we left none remaining.
We only took the cattle for a prey to ourselves, with the spoil of the cities which we had taken.
From Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, and from the city that is in the valley, even to Gilead, there was not a city too high for us. Jehovah our God delivered up all before us.
Only to the land of the sons of Ammon thou did not come near, all the side of the river Jabbok, and the cities of the hill-country, and wherever Jehovah our God forbad us.

Then we turned, and went up the way to Bashan. And Og the king of Bashan came out against us, he and all his people, to battle at Edrei.
And Jehovah said to me, Fear him not, for I have delivered him, and all his people, and his land, into thy hand. And thou shall do to him as thou did to Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon.
So Jehovah our God delivered into our hand Og also, the king of Bashan, and all his people, and we smote him until none was left to him remaining.
And we took all his cities at that time. There was not a city which we did not take from them, sixty cities, all the region of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
All these were cities fortified with high walls, gates, and bars; besides the un-walled towns a great many.
And we utterly destroyed them, as we did to Sihon king of Heshbon, utterly destroying every inhabited city, with the women and the little ones.
But all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities, we took for a prey to ourselves.
And we took the land at that time out of the hand of the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, from the valley of the Arnon to mount Hermon
(the Sidonians call Hermon, Sirion, and the Amorites call it Senir),
all the cities of the plain, and all Gilead, and all Bashan, to Salecah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan.
(For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of the Rephaim. Behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron. Is it not in Rabbah of the sons of Ammon? Nine cubits was the length of it, and four cubits the breadth of it, after the cubit of a man.)
And we took this land in possession at that time. From Aroer, which is by the valley of the Arnon, and half the hill-country of Gilead, and the cities of it, I gave to the Reubenites and to the Gadites.
And the rest of Gilead, and all Bashan, the kingdom of Og, I gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh, all the region of Argob, even all Bashan. The same is called the land of Rephaim.
(Jair the son of Manasseh took all the region of Argob, to the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and called them, even Bashan, after his own name, Havvoth-jair, to this day.)
And I gave Gilead to Machir.
And I gave to the Reubenites and to the Gadites from Gilead even to the valley of the Arnon, the middle of the valley, and the border of it, even to the river Jabbok, which is the border of the sons of Ammon,
also the Arabah, and the Jordan and the border of it, from Chinnereth even to the sea of the Arabah, the Salt Sea, under the slopes of Pisgah eastward.
And I commanded you at that time, saying, Jehovah your God has given you this land to possess it. Ye shall pass over armed before your brothers the sons of Israel, all the men of valor.
But your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle, (I know that ye have much cattle,) shall abide in your cities which I have given you
until Jehovah gives rest to your brothers, as to you, and they also possess the land which Jehovah your God gives them beyond the Jordan, then ye shall return every man to his possession, which I have given you.
And I commanded Joshua at that time, saying, Thine eyes have seen all that Jehovah your God has done to these two kings. So shall Jehovah do to all the kingdoms where thou go over.
Ye shall not fear them, for Jehovah your God, he it is who fights for you.
And I besought Jehovah at that time, saying,
O lord Jehovah, thou have begun to show thy servant thy greatness, and thy strong hand, for what god is there in heaven or in earth, that can do according to thy works, and according to thy mighty acts?
Let me go over, I pray thee, and see the good land that is beyond the Jordan, that goodly mountain, and Lebanon.
But Jehovah was angry with me because of you, and did not hearken to me. And Jehovah said to me, It shall be enough for thee. Speak no more to me of this matter.
Get thee up to the top of Pisgah, and lift up thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and eastward, and behold with thine eyes, for thou shall not go over this Jordan.
But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him, for he shall go over before this people, and he shall cause them to inherit the land which thou shall see.
So we abode in the valley opposite Beth-peor.

And now, O Israel, hearken to the statutes and to the ordinances, which I teach you, to do them, that ye may live, and go in and possess the land which Jehovah, the God of your fathers, gives you.
Ye shall not add to the word which I command you, neither shall ye diminish from it, that ye may keep the commandments of Jehovah your God which I command you.
Your eyes have seen what Jehovah did because of Baal-peor. For all the men who followed Baal-peor, Jehovah thy God has destroyed them from the midst of thee.
But ye who clung to Jehovah your God are alive every one of you this day.
Behold, I have taught you statutes and ordinances, even as Jehovah my God commanded me, that ye should do so in the midst of the land where ye go in to possess it.
Keep therefore and do them, for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the peoples, who shall hear all these statutes, and say, Surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people.
For what great nation is there that has a god so near to them, as Jehovah our God is whenever we call upon him?
And what great nation is there that has statutes and ordinances so righteous as all this law, which I set before you this day?
Only take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine eyes saw, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life, but make them known to thy sons and thy son's sons-
the day that thou stood before Jehovah thy God in Horeb, when Jehovah said to me, Assemble the people to me, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn to fear me all the days that they live upon the earth, and that they may teach their sons.
And ye came near and stood under the mountain, and the mountain burned with fire to the heart of heaven, with darkness, cloud, and thick darkness.
And Jehovah spoke to you out of the midst of the fire. Ye heard the voice of words, but ye saw no form, only a voice.
And he declared to you his covenant, which he commanded you to perform, even the ten commandments. And he wrote them upon two tablets of stone.
And Jehovah commanded me at that time to teach you statutes and ordinances, that ye might do them in the land where ye go over to possess it.
Take ye therefore good heed to yourselves, for ye saw no manner of form on the day that Jehovah spoke to you in Horeb out of the midst of the fire.
Lest ye corrupt yourselves, and make for you a graven image in the form of any figure, the likeness of male or female,
the likeness of any beast that is on the earth, the likeness of any winged bird that flies in the sky,
the likeness of anything that creeps on the ground, the likeness of any fish that is in the water under the earth.
And lest thou lift up thine eyes to heaven, and when thou see the sun and the moon and the stars, even all the host of heaven, thou be drawn away and worship them, and serve them, which Jehovah thy God has allotted to all the peoples under the whole heaven.
But Jehovah has taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron furnace, out of Egypt, to be to him a people of inheritance, as at this day.
Furthermore Jehovah was angry with me because of you, and swore that I would not go over the Jordan, and that I would not go in to that good land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance,
but I must die in this land. I must not go over the Jordan, but ye shall go over, and possess that good land.
Take heed to yourselves, lest ye forget the covenant of Jehovah your God, which he made with you, and make you a graven image in the form of anything which Jehovah thy God has forbidden thee.
For Jehovah thy God is a consuming fire, a jealous God.
When thou shall beget sons, and son's sons, and ye shall have been long in the land, and shall corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image in the form of anything, and shall do that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah thy God, to provoke him to anger,
I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land to which ye go over the Jordan to possess it. Ye shall not prolong your days upon it, but shall be utterly destroyed.
And Jehovah will scatter you among the peoples, and ye shall be left few in number among the nations where Jehovah shall lead you away.
And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor eat, nor smell.
But from there ye shall seek Jehovah thy God. And thou shall find him when thou search after him with all thy heart and with all thy soul.
When thou are in tribulation, and all these things have come upon thee, in the latter days thou shall return to Jehovah thy God, and hearken to his voice.
For Jehovah thy God is a merciful God. He will not fail thee, neither destroy thee, nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he swore to them.
For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee, since the day that God created man upon the earth, and from the one end of heaven to the other, whether there has been anything as this great thing is, or has been heard like it?
Did a people ever hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as thou have heard, and live?
Or has God assayed to go and take for him a nation from the midst of another nation, by trials, by signs, and by wonders, and by war, and by a mighty hand, and by an outstretched arm, and by great terrors, according to all that Jehovah your God did for you in Egypt before your eyes?
It was shown to thee, that thou might know that Jehovah he is God. There is none else besides him.
Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might instruct thee. And upon earth he made thee to see his great fire, and thou heard his words out of the midst of the fire.
And because he loved thy fathers, therefore he chose their seed after them, and brought thee out with his presence, with his great power, out of Egypt,
to drive out nations from before thee greater and mightier than thou, to bring thee in, to give thee their land for an inheritance, as at this day.
Know therefore this day, and lay it to thy heart, that Jehovah he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath. There is none else.
And thou shall keep his statutes, and his commandments, which I command thee this day, that it may go well with thee, and with thy sons after thee, and that thou may prolong thy days in the land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee, forever.
Then Moses set apart three cities beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise,
namely, Bezer in the wilderness, in the plain country, for the Reubenites; and Ramoth in Gilead, for the Gadites; and Golan in Bashan, for the Manassites.
And this is the law which Moses set before the sons of Israel.
These are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which Moses spoke to the sons of Israel, when they came forth out of Egypt,
beyond the Jordan, in the valley opposite Beth-peor, in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon, whom Moses and the sons of Israel smote when they came forth out of Egypt.
And they took his land in possession, and the land of Og king of Bashan, the two kings of the Amorites, who were beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise,
from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, even to mount Sion (the same is Hermon),
and all the Arabah beyond the Jordan eastward, even to the sea of the Arabah, under the slopes of Pisgah.

And Moses called to all Israel, and said to them, Hear, O Israel, the statutes and the ordinances which I speak in your ears this day, that ye may learn them, and observe to do them.
Jehovah our God made a covenant with us in Horeb.
Jehovah did not make this covenant with our fathers, but with us, even us, who are all of us here alive this day.
Jehovah spoke with you face to face in the mount out of the midst of the fire
(I stood between Jehovah and you at that time, to show you the word of Jehovah, for ye were afraid because of the fire, and did not go up onto the mount), saying,
I am Jehovah thy God who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Thou shall have no other gods before me.
any likeness that is in heaven above, or that is on the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth.
Thou shall not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them, for I, Jehovah thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons, and upon the third and upon the fourth generation of those who hate me,
and showing loving kindness to thousands of those who love me and keep my commandments.
Thou shall not take the name of Jehovah thy God in vain, for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless who takes his name in vain.
Observe the sabbath day, to keep it holy, as Jehovah thy God commanded thee.
Six days thou shall labor, and do all thy work,
thou shall not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, nor thy man-servant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thine ox, nor thy donkey, nor any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates, that thy man-servant and thy maid-servant may rest as well as thou.
And thou shall remember that thou were a servant in the land of Egypt, and Jehovah thy God brought thee out from there by a mighty hand and by an outstretched arm, therefore Jehovah thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day.
Honor thy father and thy mother, as Jehovah thy God commanded thee, that thy days may be long, and that it may go well with thee in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Thou shall not murder.
Neither shall thou commit adultery.
Neither shall thou steal.
Neither shall thou bear false witness against thy neighbor.
Neither shall thou covet thy neighbor's wife. Neither shall thou desire thy neighbor's house, his field, or his man-servant, or his maid-servant, his ox, or his donkey, or anything that is thy neighbor's.
These words Jehovah spoke to all your assembly on the mount out of the midst of the fire, of the cloud, and of the thick darkness, with a great voice, and he added no more. And he wrote them upon two tablets of stone, and gave them to me.
And it came to pass, when ye heard the voice out of the midst of the darkness, while the mountain was burning with fire, that ye came near to me, even all the heads of your tribes, and your elders.
And ye said, Behold, Jehovah our God has shown us his glory and his greatness, and we have heard his voice out of the midst of the fire. We have seen this day that God speaks with man, and he lives.
Now therefore why should we die? For this great fire will consume us. If we hear the voice of Jehovah our God any more, then we shall die.
For who is there of all flesh, who has heard the voice of the living God speaking out of the midst of the fire, as we have, and lived?
Go thou near, and hear all that Jehovah our God shall say. And speak thou to us all that Jehovah our God shall speak to thee, and we will hear it, and do it.
And Jehovah heard the voice of your words, when ye spoke to me. And Jehovah said to me, I have heard the voice of the words of this people, which they have spoken to thee. They have well said all that they have spoken.
Oh that there were such a heart in them that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments always, that it might be well with them, and with their sons forever!
Go say to them, Return ye to your tents.
But as for thee, stand thou here by me, and I will speak to thee all the commandment, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which thou shall teach them, that they may do them in the land which I give them to possess it.
Ye shall observe to do therefore as Jehovah your God has commanded you. Ye shall not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
Ye shall walk in all the way which Jehovah your God has commanded you, that ye may live, and that it may be well with you, and that ye may prolong your days in the land which ye shall possess.

Now this is the commandment, the statutes and the ordinances, which Jehovah your God commanded to teach you, that ye might do them in the land where ye go over to possess it,
that thou might fear Jehovah thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of thy life, and that thy days may be prolonged.
Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it, that it may be well with thee, and that ye may increase mightily, as Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, has promised to thee, in a land flowing with milk and honey.
Jehovah our God is one Jehovah.
And thou shall love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might.
And these words, which I command thee this day, shall be upon thy heart.
And thou shall teach them diligently to thy sons, and shall talk of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou rise up.
And thou shall bind them for a sign upon thy hand, and they shall be for frontlets between thine eyes.
And thou shall write them upon the door-posts of thy house, and upon thy gates.
And it shall be, when Jehovah thy God shall bring thee into the land which he swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give thee, great and goodly cities, which thou did not build,
and houses full of all good things, which thou did not fill, and cisterns hewn out, which thou did not hew, vineyards and olive trees, which thou did not plant, and thou shall eat and be full,
then beware lest thou forget Jehovah, who brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
Thou shall fear Jehovah thy God, and him thou shall serve, and shall swear by his name.
Ye shall not go after other gods, of the gods of the peoples that are round about you,
for Jehovah thy God in the midst of thee is a jealous God, lest the anger of Jehovah thy God be kindled against thee, and he destroy thee from off the face of the earth.
Ye shall not challenge Jehovah your God, as ye challenged him in Massah.
Ye shall diligently keep the commandments of Jehovah your God, and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he has commanded thee.
And thou shall do that which is right and good in the sight of Jehovah, that it may be well with thee, and that thou may go in and possess the good land which Jehovah swore to thy fathers,
to thrust out all thine enemies from before thee, as Jehovah has spoken.
When thy son asks thee in time to come, saying, What is the meaning of the testimonies, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which Jehovah our God has commanded you?
Then thou shall say to thy son, We were Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt, and Jehovah brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
And Jehovah showed signs and wonders, great and grievous, upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his house, before our eyes.
And he brought us out from there that he might bring us in to give us the land which he swore to our fathers.
And Jehovah commanded us to do all these statutes, to fear Jehovah our God for our good always, that he might preserve us alive as at this day.
And it shall be righteousness to us, if we observe to do all this commandment before Jehovah our God as he has commanded us.

When Jehovah thy God shall bring thee into the land where thou go to possess it, and shall cast out many nations before thee, the Hittite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite, seven nations greater and mightier than thou,
and when Jehovah thy God shall deliver them up before thee, and thou shall smite them, then thou shall utterly destroy them. Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor show mercy to them.
Neither shall thou make marriages with them. Thy daughter thou shall not give to his son, nor his daughter shall thou take to thy son.
For he will turn away thy son from following me, that they may serve other gods, so the anger of Jehovah will be kindled against you, and he will destroy thee quickly.
Ye shall break down their altars, and dash in pieces their pillars, and hew down their Asherim, and burn their graven images with fire.
For thou are a holy people to Jehovah thy God. Jehovah thy God has chosen thee to be a people for his own possession, above all peoples that are upon the face of the earth.
Jehovah did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were more in number than any people, for ye were the fewest of all peoples,
but because Jehovah loves you. And because he would keep the oath which he swore to your fathers, Jehovah has brought you out with a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of bondage, from the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.
Know therefore that Jehovah thy God, he is God, the faithful God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness with those who love him and keep his commandments to a thousand generations,
and repays those who hate him to their face, to destroy them. He will not be slack to him who hates him. He will repay him to his face.
Thou shall therefore keep the commandment, and the statutes, and the ordinances, which I command thee this day, to do them.
And it shall come to pass, because ye hearken to these ordinances, and keep and do them, that Jehovah thy God will keep with thee the covenant and the loving kindness which he swore to thy fathers.
And he will love thee, and bless thee, and multiply thee. He will also bless the fruit of thy body and the fruit of thy ground, thy grain and thy new wine and thine oil, the increase of thy cattle and the young of thy flock, in the land which he swore to thy fathers to give thee.
Thou shall be blessed above all peoples. There shall not be male or female barren among you, or among your cattle.
And Jehovah will take away from thee all sickness. And none of the evil diseases of Egypt, which thou know, will he put upon thee, but will lay them upon all those who hate thee.
And thou shall consume all the peoples that Jehovah thy God shall deliver to thee. Thine eye shall not pity them. Neither shall thou serve their gods, for that will be a snare to thee.
If thou shall say in thy heart, These nations are more than I. How can I dispossess them?
the great trials which thine eyes saw, and the signs, and the wonders, and the mighty hand, and the outstretched arm by which Jehovah thy God brought thee out. So shall Jehovah thy God do to all the peoples of whom thou are afraid.
Moreover Jehovah thy God will send the hornet among them until those who are left and hide themselves perish from before thee.
Thou shall not be frightened at them, for Jehovah thy God is in the midst of thee, a great God and awesome.
And Jehovah thy God will cast out those nations before thee little by little. Thou may not consume them at once, lest the beasts of the field increase upon thee.
But Jehovah thy God will deliver them up before thee, and will discomfit them with a great confusion until they be destroyed.
And he will deliver their kings into thy hand, and thou shall make their name to perish from under heaven. There shall no man be able to stand before thee, until thou have destroyed them.
Ye shall burn the graven images of their gods with fire. Thou shall not covet the silver or the gold that is on them, nor take it to thee, lest thou be snared by it, for it is an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
And thou shall not bring an abomination into thy house, and become a devoted thing like it. Thou shall utterly detest it, and thou shall utterly abhor it, for it is a cursed thing.

All the commandment which I command thee this day ye shall observe to do, that ye may live, and multiply, and go in and possess the land which Jehovah swore to your fathers.
And thou shall remember all the way which Jehovah thy God has led thee these forty years in the wilderness, that he might humble thee, to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart, whether thou would keep his commandments, or not.
And he humbled thee, and allowed thee to hunger, and fed thee with manna, which thou knew not, neither did thy fathers know, that he might make thee know that man does not live by bread alone, but man lives by everything that proceeds out of the mouth of Jehovah.
Thy raiment did not grow old upon thee, neither did thy foot swell, these forty years.
And thou shall consider in thy heart, that, as a man chastens his son, so Jehovah thy God chastens thee.
And thou shall keep the commandments of Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways, and to fear him.
For Jehovah thy God brings thee into a good land, a land of brooks of water, of fountains and springs, flowing forth in valleys and hills;
a land of wheat and barley, and vines and fig trees and pomegranates, a land of olive trees and honey,
a land in which thou shall eat bread without scarceness. Thou shall not lack anything in it, a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou may dig copper.
And thou shall eat and be full, and thou shall bless Jehovah thy God for the good land which he has given thee.
Beware lest thou forget Jehovah thy God, in not keeping his commandments, and his ordinances, and his statutes, which I command thee this day.
Lest, when thou have eaten and are full, and have built goodly houses, and dwelt in it,
and when thy herds and thy flocks multiply, and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied, and all that thou have is multiplied,
then thy heart be lifted up, and thou forget Jehovah thy God, who brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage,
who led thee through the great and terrible wilderness-fiery serpents and scorpions, and thirsty ground where was no water-who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint,
who fed thee in the wilderness with manna, which thy fathers did not know, that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee, to do thee good at thy latter end.
And lest thou say in thy heart, My power and the might of my hand has gotten me this wealth.
But thou shall remember Jehovah thy God, for it is he who gives thee power to get wealth, that he may establish his covenant which he swore to thy fathers, as at this day.
And it shall be, if thou shall forget Jehovah thy God, and walk after other gods, and serve them, and worship them, I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish.
As the nations that Jehovah makes to perish before you, so shall ye perish, because ye would not hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God.

Thou are to pass over the Jordan this day, to go in to dispossess nations greater and mightier than thyself, cities great and fortified up to heaven,
a people great and tall, the sons of the Anakim, whom thou know, and of whom thou have heard say, Who can stand before the sons of Anak?
Know therefore this day, that Jehovah thy God is he who goes over before thee as a devouring fire. He will destroy them, and he will bring them down before thee. So thou shall drive them out, and make them to perish quickly, as Jehovah has spoken to thee.
Do not speak thou in thy heart, after Jehovah thy God has thrust them out from before thee, saying, For my righteousness Jehovah has brought me in to possess this land. Whereas for the wickedness of these nations Jehovah drives them out from before thee.
Not for thy righteousness, or for the uprightness of thy heart, do thou go in to possess their land, but for the wickedness of these nations Jehovah thy God drives them out from before thee, and that he may establish the word which Jehovah swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
Know therefore, that Jehovah thy God does not give thee this good land to possess it for thy righteousness, for thou are a stiff-necked people.
Remember, do not thou forget how thou provoked Jehovah thy God to wrath in the wilderness. From the day that thou went forth out of the land of Egypt, until ye came to this place, ye have been rebellious against Jehovah.
Also in Horeb ye provoked Jehovah to wrath, and Jehovah was angry with you to destroy you.
When I was gone up onto the mount to receive the tablets of stone, even the tablets of the covenant which Jehovah made with you, then I abode on the mount forty days and forty nights. I neither ate bread nor drank water.
And Jehovah delivered to me the two tablets of stone written with the finger of God. And on them was according to all the words, which Jehovah spoke with you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly.
And it came to pass, at the end of forty days and forty nights, that Jehovah gave me the two tablets of stone, even the tablets of the covenant.
And Jehovah said to me, Arise, get thee down quickly from here, for thy people that thou have brought forth out of Egypt have corrupted themselves. They have quickly turned aside out of the way which I commanded them. They have made them a molten image.
Furthermore Jehovah spoke to me, saying, I have seen this people, and, behold, it is a stiff-necked people.
Let me alone, that I may destroy them, and blot out their name from under heaven, and I will make of thee a nation mightier and greater than they.
So I turned and came down from the mount, and the mount was burning with fire. And the two tablets of the covenant were in my two hands.
And I looked, and, behold, ye had sinned against Jehovah your God. Ye had made you a molten calf. Ye had turned aside quickly out of the way which Jehovah had commanded you.
And I took hold of the two tablets, and cast them out of my two hands, and broke them before your eyes.
And I fell down before Jehovah, as at the first, forty days and forty nights. I neither ate bread nor drank water, because of all your sin which ye sinned, in doing that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger.
For I was afraid of the anger and hot displeasure with which Jehovah was angry against you to destroy you. But Jehovah hearkened to me that time also.
And Jehovah was very angry with Aaron to destroy him. And I prayed for Aaron also at the same time.
And I took your sin, the calf which ye had made, and burnt it with fire, and stamped it, grinding it very small, until it was as fine as dust. And I cast the dust of it into the brook that descended out of the mount.
And at Taberah, and at Massah, and at Kibroth-hattaavah, ye provoked Jehovah to wrath.
And when Jehovah sent you from Kadesh-barnea, saying, Go up and possess the land which I have given you, then ye rebelled against the commandment of Jehovah your God, and ye did not believe him, nor hearken to his voice.
Ye have been rebellious against Jehovah from the day that I knew you.
So I fell down before Jehovah the forty days and forty nights that I fell down, because Jehovah had said he would destroy you.
And I prayed to Jehovah, and said, O lord Jehovah, destroy not thy people and thine inheritance, that thou have redeemed through thy greatness, that thou have brought forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand.
Remember thy servants, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Look not to the stubbornness of this people, nor to their profaneness, nor to their sin,
lest the land from where thou brought us out say, Because Jehovah was not able to bring them into the land which he promised to them, and because he hated them, he has brought them out to kill them in the wilderness.
Yet they are thy people and thine inheritance, which thou brought out by thy great power and by thine outstretched arm.

At that time Jehovah said to me, Hew thee two tablets of stone like the first, and come up to me onto the mount, and make thee an ark of wood.
And I will write on the tablets the words that were on the first tablets which thou broke, and thou shall put them in the ark.
So I made an ark of acacia wood, and hewed two tablets of stone like the first, and went up onto the mount, having the two tablets in my hand.
And he wrote on the tablets according to the first writing, the ten commandments, which Jehovah spoke to you in the mount out of the midst of the fire in the day of the assembly, and Jehovah gave them to me.
And I turned and came down from the mount, and put the tablets in the ark which I had made. And they are there as Jehovah commanded me.
(And the sons of Israel journeyed from Beeroth Bene-jaakan to Moserah. There Aaron died, and there he was buried, and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his stead.
From there they journeyed to Gudgodah, and from Gudgodah to Jotbathah, a land of brooks of water.
At that time Jehovah set apart the tribe of Levi, to bear the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, to stand before Jehovah to minister to him, and to bless in his name, to this day.
Therefore Levi has no portion nor inheritance with his brothers. Jehovah is his inheritance, according as Jehovah thy God spoke to him.)
Jehovah would not destroy thee.
And Jehovah said to me, Arise, take thy journey before the people, and they shall go in and possess the land, which I swore to their fathers to give to them.
And now, Israel, what does Jehovah thy God require of thee, but to fear Jehovah thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, and to serve Jehovah thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul,
to keep the commandments of Jehovah, and his statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good?
Behold, to Jehovah thy God belongs heaven and the heaven of heavens, the earth, with all that is in it.
Only Jehovah had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even you above all peoples as at this day.
Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiff-necked.
For Jehovah your God, he is God of gods, and Lord of lords, the great God, the mighty, and the awesome, who regards not persons, nor takes reward.
He executes justice for the fatherless and widow, and loves the sojourner in giving him food and raiment.
Love ye therefore the sojourner, for ye were sojourners in the land of Egypt.
Thou shall fear Jehovah thy God. Him thou shall serve, and to him thou shall cling, and by his name thou shall swear.
He is thy praise, and he is thy God, who has done for thee these great and awesome things, which thine eyes have seen.
Thy fathers went down into Egypt, in souls, seventy. And now Jehovah thy God has made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude.

Therefore thou shall love Jehovah thy God, and keep his charge, and his statutes, and his ordinances, and his commandments, always.
And ye know this day, for it is not with your sons who have not known, and who have not seen the chastisement of Jehovah your God, his greatness, his mighty hand, and his outstretched arm,
and his signs, and his works, which he did in the midst of Egypt to Pharaoh the king of Egypt, and to all his land,
and what he did to the army of Egypt, to their horses, and to their chariots, how he made the water of the Red Sea to overflow them as they pursued after you, and how Jehovah has destroyed them to this day,
and what he did to you in the wilderness, until ye came to this place,
and what he did to Dathan and Abiram, the sons of Eliab, the son of Reuben, how the earth opened its mouth, and swallowed them up, and their households, and their tents, and every living thing that followed them, in the midst of all Israel,
but your eyes have seen all the great work of Jehovah which he did.
Therefore ye shall keep all the commandment which I command thee this day, that ye may be strong, and go in and possess the land, where ye go over to possess it,
and that ye may prolong your days in the land, which Jehovah swore to your fathers to give to them and to their seed, a land flowing with milk and honey.
For the land, where thou go in to possess it, is not as the land of Egypt, from where ye came out, where thou sowed thy seed, and watered it with thy foot, as a garden of herbs,
but the land, where ye go over to possess it, is a land of hills and valleys, and drinks water from the rain of heaven,
a land which Jehovah thy God cares for. The eyes of Jehovah thy God are always upon it, from the beginning of the year even to the end of the year.
And it shall come to pass, if ye shall hearken diligently to my commandments which I command you this day, to love Jehovah your God, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul,
that I will give the rain of your land in its season, the former rain and the latter rain, that thou may gather in thy grain, and thy new wine, and thine oil.
And I will give grass in thy fields for thy cattle, and thou shall eat and be full.
Take heed to yourselves, lest your heart be deceived, and ye turn aside, and serve other gods, and worship them,
and the anger of Jehovah be kindled against you, and he shut up the heavens, so that there shall be no rain, and the land shall not yield its fruit, and ye perish quickly from off the good land which Jehovah gives you.
Therefore ye shall lay up these my words in your heart and in your soul. And ye shall bind them for a sign upon your hand, and they shall be for frontlets between your eyes.
And ye shall teach them to your sons, talking of them when thou sit in thy house, and when thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou rise up.
And thou shall write them upon the door-posts of thy house, and upon thy gates,
that your days may be multiplied, and the days of your sons, in the land which Jehovah swore to your fathers to give them, as the days of the heavens above the earth.
For if ye shall diligently keep all this commandment which I command you, to do it, to love Jehovah your God, to walk in all his ways, and to cling to him,
then will Jehovah drive out all these nations from before you, and ye shall dispossess nations greater and mightier than yourselves.
Every place on which the sole of your foot shall tread shall be yours, from the wilderness, and Lebanon, from the river, the river Euphrates, even to the hinder sea shall be your border.
There shall no man be able to stand before you. Jehovah your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the land that ye shall tread upon, as he has spoken to you.
the blessing, if ye shall hearken to the commandments of Jehovah your God, which I command you this day,
and the curse, if ye shall not hearken to the commandments of Jehovah your God, but turn aside out of the way which I command you this day to go after other gods, which ye have not known.
And it shall come to pass, when Jehovah thy God shall bring thee into the land where thou go to possess it, that thou shall set the blessing upon mount Gerizim, and the curse upon mount Ebal.
Are they not beyond the Jordan, behind the way of the going down of the sun, in the land of the Canaanites who dwell in the Arabah, opposite Gilgal, beside the oaks of Moreh?
For ye are to pass over the Jordan to go in to possess the land which Jehovah your God gives you, and ye shall possess it, and dwell in it.
And ye shall observe to do all the statutes and the ordinances which I set before you this day.

These are the statutes and the ordinances which ye shall observe to do in the land which Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, has given thee to possess it all the days that ye live upon the earth.
Ye shall surely destroy all the places in which the nations that ye shall dispossess served their gods, upon the high mountains, and upon the hills, and under every green tree.
And ye shall break down their altars, and dash in pieces their pillars, and burn their Asherim with fire. And ye shall hew down the graven images of their gods, and ye shall destroy their name out of that place.
Ye shall not do so to Jehovah your God.
But to the place which Jehovah your God shall choose out of all your tribes, to put his name there, even to his habitation ye shall seek, and there thou shall come.
And there ye shall bring your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, and your tithes, and the heave offering of your hand, and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and the firstlings of your herd and of your flock.
And there ye shall eat before Jehovah your God, and ye shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand to, ye and your households, in which Jehovah thy God has blessed thee.
Ye shall not do after all the things that we do here this day, every man whatever is right in his own eyes.
For ye are not as yet come to the rest and to the inheritance, which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
But when ye go over the Jordan, and dwell in the land which Jehovah your God causes you to inherit, and he gives you rest from all your enemies round about, so that ye dwell in safety,
your burnt offerings, and your sacrifices, your tithes, and the heave offering of your hand, and all your choice vows which ye vow to Jehovah.
And ye shall rejoice before Jehovah your God, ye, and your sons, and your daughters, and your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and the Levite who is within your gates-inasmuch as he has no portion nor inheritance with you.
Take heed to thyself that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every place that thou see,
but in the place which Jehovah shall choose in one of thy tribes. There thou shall offer thy burnt offerings, and there thou shall do all that I command thee.
Notwithstanding, thou may kill and eat flesh within all thy gates, after all the desire of thy soul, according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God which he has given thee, the unclean and the clean may eat of it, as of the gazelle, and as of the hart.
Only ye shall not eat the blood. Thou shall pour it out upon the ground as water.
Thou may not eat within thy gates the tithe of thy grain, or of thy new wine, or of thine oil, or the firstlings of thy herd or of thy flock, nor any of thy vows which thou vow, nor thy freewill offerings, nor the heave offering of thy hand.
But thou shall eat them before Jehovah thy God in the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, and the Levite who is within thy gates. And thou shall rejoice before Jehovah thy God in all that thou put thy hand to.
Take heed to thyself that thou not forsake the Levite as long as thou live in thy land.
When Jehovah thy God shall enlarge thy border, as he has promised thee, and thou shall say, I will eat flesh, because thy soul desires to eat flesh, thou may eat flesh, after all the desire of thy soul.
If the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose, to put his name there, be too far from thee, then thou shall kill of thy herd and of thy flock, which Jehovah has given thee, as I have commanded thee, and thou may eat within thy gates, according to all the desire of thy soul.
Even as the gazelle and as the hart is eaten, so thou shall eat of it. The unclean and the clean may eat of it alike.
Only be sure that thou not eat the blood. For the blood is the life, and thou shall not eat the life with the flesh.
Thou shall not eat it. Thou shall pour it out upon the ground as water.
Thou shall not eat it, that it may go well with thee, and with thy sons after thee, when thou shall do that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah.
Only thy holy things which thou have, and thy vows, thou shall take, and go to the place which Jehovah shall choose.
And thou shall offer thy burnt offerings, the flesh and the blood, upon the altar of Jehovah thy God, and the blood of thy sacrifices shall be poured out upon the altar of Jehovah thy God, and thou shall eat the flesh.
Observe and hear all these words which I command thee, that it may go well with thee, and with thy sons after thee forever, when thou do that which is good and right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.
When Jehovah thy God shall cut off the nations from before thee, where thou go in to dispossess them, and thou dispossess them, and dwell in their land,
take heed to thyself that thou be not ensnared to follow them, after they are destroyed from before thee, and that thou not inquire after their gods, saying, How do these nations serve their gods? Even so I will do likewise.
Thou shall not do so to Jehovah thy God. For every abomination to Jehovah, which he hates, they have done to their gods, for they even burn their sons and their daughters in the fire to their gods.
Whatever thing I command you, that shall ye observe to do. Thou shall not add to it, nor diminish from it.

If there arise in the midst of thee a prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and he gives thee a sign or a wonder,
and the sign or the wonder comes to pass, of which he spoke to thee, saying, Let us go after other gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve them,
thou shall not hearken to the words of that prophet, or to that dreamer of dreams, for Jehovah your God proves you, to know whether ye love Jehovah your God with all your heart and with all your soul.
Ye shall walk after Jehovah your God, and fear him, and keep his commandments, and obey his voice, and ye shall serve him, and cling to him.
And that prophet, or that dreamer of dreams, shall be put to death, because he has spoken rebellion against Jehovah your God, who brought you out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of bondage, to draw thee aside out of the way which Jehovah thy God commanded thee to walk in. So shall thou put away the evil from the midst of thee.
If thy brother, the son of thy mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom, or thy friend, who is as thine own soul, entices thee secretly, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which thou have not known, thou, nor thy fathers,
of the gods of the peoples that are round about you, near to thee, or far off from thee, from the one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth,
thou shall not consent to him, nor hearken to him. Neither shall thine eye pity him, neither shall thou spare, neither shall thou conceal him,
but thou shall surely kill him. Thy hand shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterwards the hand of all the people.
And thou shall stone him to death with stones, because he has sought to draw thee away from Jehovah thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
And all Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall no more do any such wickedness as this is in the midst of thee.
If thou shall hear tell concerning one of thy cities, which Jehovah thy God gives thee to dwell there, saying,
Certain base fellows have gone out from the midst of thee, and have drawn away the inhabitants of their city, saying, Let us go and serve other gods, which ye have not known,
then thou shall inquire, and make search, and ask diligently. And, behold, if it be true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in the midst of thee,
thou shall surely smite the inhabitants of that city with the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly, and all that is in it, and the cattle in it, with the edge of the sword.
And thou shall gather all the spoil of it into the midst of the street of it, and shall burn the city with fire, and all the spoil of it, every whit, to Jehovah thy God, and it shall be a heap forever. It shall not be built again.
And nothing of the devoted thing shall cling to thy hand, that Jehovah may turn from the fierceness of his anger, and show thee mercy, and have compassion upon thee, and multiply thee, as he has sworn to thy fathers,
when thou shall hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep all his commandments which I command thee this day, to do that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah thy God.

Ye are the sons of Jehovah your God. Ye shall not cut yourselves, nor make any baldness between your eyes for the dead.
For thou are a holy people to Jehovah thy God, and Jehovah has chosen thee to be a people for his own possession, above all peoples that are upon the face of the earth.
Thou shall not eat any abominable thing.
the ox, the sheep, and the goat,
the hart, and the gazelle, and the roebuck, and the wild goat, and the ibex, and the antelope, and the chamois.
And every beast that parts the hoof, and has the hoof cloven in two, and chews the cud, among the beasts, that may ye eat.
the camel, and the hare, and the coney, because they chew the cud but do not part the hoof, they are unclean to you,
and the swine, because he parts the hoof but does not chew the cud, he is unclean to you. Of their flesh ye shall not eat, and their carcasses ye shall not touch.
whatever has fins and scales ye may eat.
And whatever does not have fins and scales ye shall not eat; it is unclean to you.
Of all clean birds ye may eat,
the eagle, and the ossifrage, and the osprey,
and the glede, and the falcon, and the kite according to its kind,
and every raven after its kind,
and the ostrich, and the night-hawk, and the sea-gull, and the hawk according to its kind,
the little owl, and the great owl, and the horned owl,
and the pelican, and the vulture, and the cormorant,
and the stork, and the heron according to its kind, and the hoopoe, and the bat.
And all winged creeping things are unclean to you. They shall not be eaten.
Of all clean birds ye may eat.
Ye shall not eat of anything that dies of itself. Thou may give it to the sojourner who is within thy gates, that he may eat it, or thou may sell it to a foreigner, for thou are a holy people to Jehovah thy God. Thou shall not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
Thou shall surely tithe all the increase of thy seed; that which comes forth from the field year by year.
And thou shall eat before Jehovah thy God, in the place which he shall choose to cause his name to dwell there, the tithe of thy grain, of thy new wine, and of thine oil, and the firstlings of thy herd and of thy flock, that thou may learn to fear Jehovah thy God always.
And if the way is too long for thee, so that thou are not able to carry it, because the place is too far from thee, which Jehovah thy God shall choose to set his name there when Jehovah thy God shall bless thee,
then thou shall turn it into money, and bind up the money in thy hand, and shall go to the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose.
And thou shall bestow the money for whatever thy soul desires, for oxen, or for sheep, or for wine, or for strong drink, or for whatever thy soul asks of thee. And thou shall eat there before Jehovah thy God, and thou shall rejoice, thou and thy household.
And the Levite who is within thy gates, thou shall not forsake him, for he has no portion nor inheritance with thee.
At the end of every three years thou shall bring forth all the tithe of thine increase in the same year, and shall lay it up within thy gates.
And the Levite, because he has no portion nor inheritance with thee, and the sojourner, and the fatherless, and the widow, who are within thy gates, shall come, and shall eat and be satisfied, that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hand which thou do.

At the end of every seven years thou shall make a release.
Every creditor shall release that which he has lent to his neighbor. He shall not exact it from his neighbor and his brother, because Jehovah's release has been proclaimed.
From a foreigner thou may exact it, but whatever of thine is with thy brother, thy hand shall release.
However there shall be no poor with thee (for Jehovah will surely bless thee in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance to possess it),
if only thou diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all this commandment which I command thee this day.
For Jehovah thy God will bless thee as he promised thee, and thou shall lend to many nations, but thou shall not borrow, and thou shall rule over many nations, but they shall not rule over thee.
If there be with thee a poor man, one of thy brothers, within any of thy gates in thy land which Jehovah thy God gives thee, thou shall not harden thy heart, nor shut thy hand from thy poor brother,
but thou shall surely open thy hand to him, and shall surely lend him sufficient for his need which he wants.
Beware that there not be a base thought in thy heart, saying, The seventh year, the year of release, is at hand, and thine eye be evil against thy poor brother, and thou give him nothing, and he cry to Jehovah against thee, and it be sin to thee.
Thou shall surely give him, and thy heart shall not be grieved when thou give to him, because for this thing Jehovah thy God will bless thee in all thy work, and in all that thou put thy hand to.
For the poor will never cease out of the land. Therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall surely open thy hand to thy brother, to thy needy, and to thy poor, in thy land.
If thy brother, a Hebrew man, or a Hebrew woman, is sold to thee, and serves thee six years, then in the seventh year thou shall let him go free from thee.
And when thou let him go free from thee, thou shall not let him go empty.
Thou shall furnish him liberally out of thy flock, and out of thy threshing-floor, and out of thy winepress. As Jehovah thy God has blessed thee thou shall give to him.
And thou shall remember that thou were a bondman in the land of Egypt, and Jehovah thy God redeemed thee. Therefore I command thee this thing today.
And it shall be, if he says to thee, I will not go out from thee, because he loves thee and thy house, because he is well with thee,
then thou shall take an awl, and thrust it through his ear to the door, and he shall be thy servant forever. And also to thy maid-servant thou shall do likewise.
It shall not seem hard to thee when thou let him go free from thee, for he has been worth a double hired servant to thee, in serving thee six years. And Jehovah thy God will bless thee in all that thou do.
All the firstling males that are born of thy herd and of thy flock thou shall sanctify to Jehovah thy God. Thou shall do no work with the firstling of thy herd, nor shear the firstling of thy flock.
Thou shall eat it before Jehovah thy God year by year in the place which Jehovah shall choose, thou and thy household.
And if it has any blemish, as lame or blind, any ill blemish whatever, thou shall not sacrifice it to Jehovah thy God.
Thou shall eat it within thy gates. The unclean man and the clean man alike, as the gazelle, and as the hart.
Only thou shall not eat the blood of it. Thou shall pour it out upon the ground as water.

Observe the month of Abib, and keep the Passover to Jehovah thy God, for in the month of Abib Jehovah thy God brought thee forth out of Egypt by night.
And thou shall sacrifice the Passover to Jehovah thy God, of the flock and the herd, in the place which Jehovah shall choose to cause his name to dwell there.
Thou shall eat no leavened bread with it. Seven days thou shall eat unleavened bread with it, even the bread of affliction, for thou came forth out of the land of Egypt in haste, that thou may remember the day when thou came forth out of the land of Egypt all the days of thy life.
And there shall be no leaven seen with thee in all thy borders seven days. Neither shall any of the flesh, which thou sacrifice the first day at evening, remain all night until the morning.
Thou may not sacrifice the Passover within any of thy gates, which Jehovah thy God gives thee,
but at the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose to cause his name to dwell in, there thou shall sacrifice the Passover at evening, at the going down of the sun, at the season that thou came forth out of Egypt.
And thou shall roast and eat it in the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose, and thou shall turn in the morning, and go to thy tents.
Six days thou shall eat unleavened bread, and on the seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to Jehovah thy God. Thou shall do no work.
Thou shall number to thee seven weeks. From the time thou begin to put the sickle to the standing grain thou shall begin to number seven weeks.
And thou shall keep the feast of weeks to Jehovah thy God with a tribute of a freewill offering from thy hand, which thou shall give, according as Jehovah thy God blesses thee.
And thou shall rejoice before Jehovah thy God, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, and the Levite who is within thy gates, and the sojourner, and the fatherless, and the widow, who are in the midst of thee, in the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there,
and thou shall remember that thou were a bondman in Egypt. And thou shall observe and do these statutes.
Thou shall keep the feast of tabernacles seven days after thou have gathered in from thy threshing-floor and from thy winepress.
And thou shall rejoice in thy feast, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy man-servant, and thy maid-servant, and the Levite, and the sojourner, and the fatherless, and the widow, who are within thy gates.
Seven days thou shall keep a feast to Jehovah thy God in the place which Jehovah shall choose, because Jehovah thy God will bless thee in all thine increase, and in all the work of thy hands, and thou shall be altogether joyful.
in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles. And they shall not appear before Jehovah empty.
Every man shall give as he is able, according to the blessing of Jehovah thy God which he has given thee.
Thou shall make judges and officers for thee in all thy gates, which Jehovah thy God gives thee, according to thy tribes, and they shall judge the people with righteous judgment.
Thou shall not distort justice. Thou shall not respect persons, neither shall thou take a bribe, for a bribe blinds the eyes of the wise, and perverts the words of the righteous.
Thou shall follow that which is altogether just, that thou may live, and inherit the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Thou shall not plant for thee an Asherah of any kind of tree beside the altar of Jehovah thy God, which thou shall make for thee.
Neither shall thou set up a pillar for thee, which Jehovah thy God hates.

Thou shall not sacrifice to Jehovah thy God an ox, or a sheep, in which is a blemish or anything bad, for that is an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
If there be found in the midst of thee, within any of thy gates which Jehovah thy God gives thee, man or woman, who does that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah thy God, in transgressing his covenant,
and has gone and served other gods, and worshiped them, or the sun, or the moon, or any of the host of heaven, which I have not commanded,
and it be told thee, and thou have heard of it, then shall thou inquire diligently. And, behold, if it be true, and the thing certain, that such abomination is wrought in Israel,
then thou shall bring forth that man or that woman, who has done this evil thing, to thy gates, even the man or the woman, and thou shall stone them to death with stones.
At the mouth of two witnesses, or three witnesses, shall he who is to die be put to death. He shall not be put to death at the mouth of one witness.
The hand of the witnesses shall be first upon him to put him to death, and afterward the hand of all the people. So thou shall put away the evil from the midst of thee.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, being matters of controversy within thy gates, then thou shall arise, and get thee up to the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose.
And thou shall come to the priests the Levites, and to the judge who shall be in those days, and thou shall inquire. And they shall show thee the sentence of judgment.
And thou shall do according to the tenor of the sentence which they shall show thee from that place which Jehovah shall choose. And thou shall observe to do according to all that they shall teach thee,
according to the tenor of the law which they shall teach thee, and according to the judgment which they shall tell thee, thou shall do. Thou shall not turn aside from the sentence, which they shall show thee, to the right hand, nor to the left.
And the man who does presumptuously, in not hearkening to the priest who stands to minister there before Jehovah thy God, or to the judge, even that man shall die, and thou shall put away the evil from Israel.
And all the people shall hear, and fear, and do no more presumptuously.
When thou have come to the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee, and shall possess it, and shall dwell in it, and shall say, I will set a king over me like all the nations that are round about me,
thou shall surely set him king over thee whom Jehovah thy God shall choose. Thou shall set a king over thee from among thy brothers. Thou may not put a foreigner over thee who is not thy brother.
Only he shall not multiply horses to himself, nor cause the people to return to Egypt, to the end that he may multiply horses, inasmuch as Jehovah has said to you, Ye shall henceforth return no more that way.
Neither shall he multiply wives to himself, that his heart turn not away. Neither shall he greatly multiply to himself silver and gold.
And it shall be, when he sits upon the throne of his kingdom, that he shall write for him a copy of this law in a book, out of it before the priests the Levites,
and it shall be with him. And he shall read in it all the days of his life, that he may learn to fear Jehovah his God, to keep all the words of this law and these statutes, to do them,
that his heart not be lifted up above his brothers, and that he turn not aside from the commandment, to the right hand, or to the left, to the end that he may prolong his days in his kingdom, he and his sons, in the midst of Israel.

The priests the Levites, even all the tribe of Levi, shall have no portion nor inheritance with Israel. They shall eat the offerings of Jehovah made by fire, and his inheritance.
And they shall have no inheritance among their brothers. Jehovah is their inheritance as he has spoken to them.
that they shall give to the priest the shoulder, and the two cheeks, and the maw.
The first-fruits of thy grain, of thy new wine, and of thine oil, and the first of the fleece of thy sheep, thou shall give him.
For Jehovah thy God has chosen him out of all thy tribes to stand to minister in the name of Jehovah, him and his sons forever.
And if a Levite comes from any of thy gates out of all Israel, where he sojourns, and comes with all the desire of his soul to the place which Jehovah shall choose,
then he shall minister in the name of Jehovah his God, as all his brothers the Levites do who stand there before Jehovah.
They shall have like portions to eat, besides that which comes of the sale of his patrimony.
When thou have come into the land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee, thou shall not learn to do according to the abominations of those nations.
There shall not be found with thee anyone who makes his son or his daughter to pass through the fire, a psychic, he who practices augury, or an enchanter, or a sorcerer,
or a charmer, or a medium, or a spiritist, or a necromancer.
For whoever does these things is an abomination to Jehovah. And because of these abominations Jehovah thy God drives them out from before thee.
Thou shall be perfect with Jehovah thy God.
For these nations, that thou shall dispossess, hearken to those who practice augury, and to psychics. But as for thee, Jehovah thy God has not allowed thee to do so.
Jehovah thy God will raise up for thee a prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brothers, like me. Ye shall hearken to him,
according to all that thou desired of Jehovah thy God in Horeb in the day of the assembly, saying, Let me not hear again the voice of Jehovah my God, neither let me see this great fire any more, that I not die.
And Jehovah said to me, They have well said that which they have spoken.
I will raise up a prophet for them from among their brothers, like thee. And I will put my words in his mouth, and he shall speak to them all that I shall command him.
And it shall come to pass, that whoever will not hearken to my words which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him.
But the prophet, who shall speak a word presumptuously in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, or who shall speak in the name of other gods, that same prophet shall die.
And if thou say in thy heart, How shall we know the word which Jehovah has not spoken?
When a prophet speaks in the name of Jehovah, if the thing does not follow, nor come to pass, that is the thing which Jehovah has not spoken. The prophet has spoken it presumptuously. Thou shall not be afraid of him.

When Jehovah thy God shall cut off the nations, whose land Jehovah thy God gives thee, and thou succeed them, and dwell in their cities, and in their houses,
thou shall set apart three cities for thee in the midst of thy land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee to possess it.
Thou shall prepare for thee the way, and divide the borders of thy land, which Jehovah thy God causes thee to inherit, into three parts, that every manslayer may flee there.
Whoever kills his neighbor unawares, and did not hate him in time past,
as when a man goes into the forest with his neighbor to hew wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the axe to cut down the tree, and the head slips from the helve, and lands upon his neighbor, so that he dies, he shall flee to one of these cities and live.
Lest the avenger of blood pursue the manslayer, while his heart is hot, and overtake him, because the way is long, and smite him mortally, whereas he was not worthy of death, inasmuch as he did not hate him in time past.
Therefore I command thee, saying, Thou shall set apart three cities for thee.
And if Jehovah thy God enlarge thy border, as he has sworn to thy fathers, and give thee all the land which he promised to give to thy fathers,
if thou shall keep all this commandment to do it, which I command thee this day, to love Jehovah thy God, and to walk ever in his ways, then shall thou add three more cities for thee, besides these three,
that innocent blood not be shed in the midst of thy land, which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance, and so blood be upon thee.
But if any man hates his neighbor, and lies in wait for him, and rises up against him, and smites him mortally so that he dies, and he flees into one of these cities,
then the elders of his city shall send and fetch him from there, and deliver him into the hand of the avenger of blood, that he may die.
Thine eye shall not pity him, but thou shall put away the innocent blood from Israel, that it may go well with thee.
Thou shall not remove thy neighbor's landmark, which they of old time have set, in thine inheritance which thou shall inherit, in the land that Jehovah thy God gives thee to possess it.
One witness shall not rise up against a man for any iniquity, or for any sin, in any sin that he sins. At the mouth of two witnesses, or at the mouth of three witnesses, shall a matter be established.
If an unrighteous witness rises up against any man to testify against him of wrong-doing,
then both the men, between whom the controversy is, shall stand before Jehovah, before the priests and the judges that shall be in those days,
and the judges shall make diligent inquiry. And, behold, if the witness is a false witness, and has testified falsely against his brother,
then ye shall do to him, as he had thought to do to his brother. So shall thou put away the evil from the midst of thee.
And those who remain shall hear, and fear, and shall henceforth commit no more any such evil in the midst of thee.
life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot.

When thou go forth to battle against thine enemies, and see horses, and chariots, and a people more than thou, thou shall not be afraid of them, for Jehovah thy God is with thee, who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And it shall be, when ye draw near to the battle, that the priest shall approach and speak to the people,
and shall say to them, Hear, O Israel, ye draw near this day to battle against your enemies. Let not your heart faint. Fear not, nor tremble, neither be ye frightened at them.
For Jehovah your God is he who goes with you, to fight for you against your enemies, to save you.
And the officers shall speak to the people, saying, What man is there who has built a new house, and has not dedicated it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man dedicate it.
And what man is there who has planted a vineyard, and has not used the fruit of it? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man use the fruit of it.
And what man is there who has betrothed a wife, and has not taken her? Let him go and return to his house, lest he die in the battle, and another man take her.
And the officers shall speak further to the people, and they shall say, What man is there who is fearful and faint-hearted? Let him go and return to his house, lest his brother's heart melt as his heart.
And it shall be, when the officers have made an end of speaking to the people, that they shall appoint captains of armies at the head of the people.
When thou draw near to a city to fight against it, then proclaim peace to it.
And it shall be, if it makes to thee an answer of peace, and opens to thee, then it shall be, that all the people that are found in it shall become tributary to thee, and shall serve thee.
And if it will make no peace with thee, but will make war against thee, then thou shall besiege it.
And when Jehovah thy God delivers it into thy hand, thou shall smite every male of it with the edge of the sword,
but the women, and the little ones, and the cattle, and all that is in the city, even all the spoil of it, thou shall take for a prey to thyself. And thou shall eat the spoil of thine enemies, which Jehovah thy God has given thee.
Thus thou shall do to all the cities which are very far off from thee, which are not of the cities of these nations.
But of the cities of these peoples, that Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance, thou shall save alive nothing that breathes,
but thou shall utterly destroy them-the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite-as Jehovah thy God has commanded thee,
that they not teach you to do after all their abominations, which they have done to their gods, so ye would sin against Jehovah your God.
When thou shall besiege a city a long time, in making war against it to take it, thou shall not destroy the trees of it by wielding an axe against them, for thou may eat of them. And thou shall not cut them down, for is the tree of the field a man, that it should be besieged by thee?
Only the trees of which thou know that they are not trees for food, thou shall destroy and cut them down. And thou shall build bulwarks against the city that makes war with thee, until it falls.

If a man is found slain in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee to possess it, lying in the field, and it not be known who has smitten him,
then thy elders and thy judges shall come forth. And they shall measure to the cities which are round about him who is slain,
and it shall be, that the city which is nearest to the slain man, even the elders of that city shall take a heifer of the herd, which has not been worked with, and which has not drawn in the yoke,
and the elders of that city shall bring down the heifer to a valley with running water, which is neither plowed nor sown, and shall break the heifer's neck there in the valley.
And the priests the sons of Levi shall come near, for Jehovah thy God has chosen them to minister to him, and to bless in the name of Jehovah, and according to their word shall every controversy and every stroke be.
And all the elders of that city, who are nearest to the slain man, shall wash their hands over the heifer whose neck was broken in the valley,
and they shall answer and say, Our hands have not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen it.
Forgive, O Jehovah, thy people Israel whom thou have redeemed, and allow no innocent blood to remain in the midst of thy people Israel. And the blood shall be forgiven them.
So shall thou put away the innocent blood from the midst of thee when thou shall do that which is right in the eyes of Jehovah.
When thou go forth to battle against thine enemies, and Jehovah thy God delivers them into thy hands, and thou carry them away captive,
and see among the captives a beautiful woman, and thou have a desire for her, and would take her to thee to wife,
then thou shall bring her home to thy house. And she shall shave her head, and pare her nails,
and she shall put the raiment of her captivity from off her, and shall remain in thy house, and bewail her father and her mother a full month. And after that thou shall go in to her, and be her husband, and she shall be thy wife.
And it shall be, if thou have no delight in her, then thou shall let her go where she will, but thou shall not sell her at all for money. Thou shall not deal with her harshly, because thou have humbled her.
If a man has two wives, the one beloved, and the other regarded inferior, and they have borne him sons, both the beloved and the one regarded inferior, and if the firstborn son be hers who was regarded inferior,
then it shall be, in the day that he causes his sons to inherit that which he has, that he may not make the son of the beloved the firstborn before the son of the one regarded inferior, who is the firstborn.
But he shall acknowledge the firstborn, the son of the one regarded inferior, by giving him a double portion of all that he has, for he is the beginning of his strength. The right of the firstborn is his.
If a man has a stubborn and rebellious son, who will not obey the voice of his father, or the voice of his mother, and, though they chasten him, will not hearken to them,
then his father and his mother shall lay hold on him, and bring him out to the elders of his city, and to the gate of his place.
And they shall say to the elders of his city, This our son is stubborn and rebellious, he will not obey our voice. He is a glutton, and a drunkard.
And all the men of his city shall stone him to death with stones. So thou shall put away the evil from the midst of thee, and all Israel shall hear, and fear.
And if a man has committed a sin worthy of death, and he be put to death, and thou hang him on a tree,
his body shall not remain all night upon the tree, but thou shall surely bury him the same day, for he who is hanged is accursed of God, that thou not defile thy land which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance.

Thou shall not see thy brother's ox or his sheep go astray, and hide thyself from them. Thou shall surely bring them again to thy brother.
And if thy brother be not near to thee, or if thou do not know him, then thou shall bring it home to thy house, and it shall be with thee until thy brother seeks after it, and thou shall restore it to him.
And so shall thou do with his donkey, and so shall thou do with his garment, and so shall thou do with every lost thing of thy brother's, which he has lost, and thou have found. Thou may not hide thyself.
Thou shall not see thy brother's donkey or his ox fallen down by the way, and hide thyself from them. Thou shall surely help him to lift them up again.
A woman shall not wear that which pertains to a man, neither shall a man put on a woman's garment, for whoever does these things is an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
If a bird's nest chance to be before thee in the way, in any tree or on the ground, with young ones or eggs, and the dam sitting upon the young or upon the eggs, thou shall not take the dam with the young.
Thou shall surely let the dam go, but the young thou may take to thyself, that it may be well with thee, and that thou may prolong thy days.
When thou build a new house, then thou shall make a guard rail for thy roof, that thou not bring blood upon thy house, if any man falls from there.
the seed which thou have sown, and the increase of the vineyard.
Thou shall not plow with an ox and a donkey together.
Thou shall not wear a mingled stuff, wool and linen together.
Thou shall make for thee hems upon the four borders of thy clothing, with which thou cover thyself.
If any man takes a wife, and goes in to her, and dislikes her,
and charges her with shameful things, and brings up an evil name upon her, and says, I took this woman, and when I came near to her, I did not find in her the tokens of virginity,
then the father of the damsel, and her mother, shall take and bring forth the tokens of the damsel's virginity to the elders of the city in the gate.
And the damsel's father shall say to the elders, I gave my daughter to this man to wife, and he dislikes her.
And, lo, he has charged her with shameful things, saying, I did not find in thy daughter the tokens of virginity, and yet these are the tokens of my daughter's virginity. And they shall spread the garment before the elders of the city.
And the elders of that city shall take the man and chastise him,
and they shall fine him a hundred shekels of silver, and give them to the father of the damsel, because he has brought up an evil name upon a virgin of Israel, and she shall be his wife. He may not put her away all his days.
But if this thing be true, that the tokens of virginity were not found in the damsel,
then they shall bring the damsel out to the door of her father's house, and the men of her city shall stone her to death with stones, because she has wrought folly in Israel, to play the harlot in her father's house. So shall thou put away the evil from the midst of thee.
If a man be found lying with a woman married to a husband, then they shall both of them die, the man that lay with the woman, and the woman. So shall thou put away the evil from Israel.
If there be a damsel who is a virgin betrothed to a husband, and a man finds her in the city, and lies with her,
then ye shall bring them both out to the gate of that city. And ye shall stone them to death with stones, the damsel, because she did not cry out, being in the city, and the man, because he has humbled his neighbor's wife. So thou shall put away the evil from the midst of thee.
But if the man finds the damsel who is betrothed in the field, and the man forces her, and lies with her, then only the man who lay with her shall die,
but to the damsel thou shall do nothing. There is in the damsel no sin worthy of death. For as when a man rises against his neighbor, and kills him, even so is this matter,
for he found her in the field, the betrothed damsel cried out, and there was none to save her.
If a man finds a damsel who is a virgin, who is not betrothed, and lays hold on her, and lies with her, and they be found,
then the man who lay with her shall give to the damsel's father fifty shekels of silver, and she shall be his wife, because he has humbled her. He may not put her away all his days.
A man shall not take his father's wife, and shall not uncover his father's skirt.

He who is wounded in the testicles, or has his private part cut off, shall not enter into the assembly of Jehovah.
A bastard shall not enter into the assembly of Jehovah, even to the tenth generation none of his shall enter into the assembly of Jehovah.
An Ammonite or a Moabite shall not enter into the assembly of Jehovah, even to the tenth generation none belonging to them shall enter into the assembly of Jehovah forever,
because they met you not with bread and with water on the way, when ye came forth out of Egypt, and because they hired against thee Balaam the son of Beor from Pethor of Mesopotamia, to curse thee.
Nevertheless Jehovah thy God would not hearken to Balaam, but Jehovah thy God turned the curse into a blessing to thee, because Jehovah thy God loved thee.
Thou shall not seek their peace nor their prosperity all thy days forever.
Thou shall not abhor an Edomite, for he is thy brother. Thou shall not abhor an Egyptian, because thou were a sojourner in his land.
The sons of the third generation who are born to them shall enter into the assembly of Jehovah.
When the army goes forth against thine enemies, then thou shall keep thee from every evil thing.
If there be among you any man, who is not clean by reason of an accident by night, then he shall go abroad out of the camp. He shall not come inside the camp.
But it shall be, when evening comes on, he shall bathe himself in water, and when the sun is down, he shall come inside the camp.
Thou shall have a place also outside the camp, where thou shall go forth abroad.
And thou shall have a paddle among thy weapons, and it shall be, when thou sit down abroad, thou shall dig with it, and shall turn back and cover that which comes from thee.
For Jehovah thy God walks in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give up thine enemies before thee. Therefore thy camp shall be holy, that he may not see an unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.
Thou shall not deliver to his master a servant who is escaped from his master to thee.
He shall dwell with thee, in the midst of thee, in the place which he shall choose within one of thy gates, where it pleases him best. Thou shall not oppress him.
There shall be no prostitute of the daughters of Israel, neither shall there be a sodomite of the sons of Israel.
Thou shall not bring the hire of a harlot, or the wages of a dog, into the house of Jehovah thy God for any vow, for even both these are an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
interest of money, interest of food, interest of anything that is lent upon interest.
To a foreigner thou may lend upon interest, but to thy brother thou shall not lend upon interest, that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all that thou put thy hand to, in the land where thou go in to possess it.
When thou shall vow a vow to Jehovah thy God, thou shall not be slack to pay it. For Jehovah thy God will surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee.
But if thou shall forbear to vow, it shall be no sin in thee.
That which has gone out of thy lips thou shall observe and do, according as thou have vowed to Jehovah thy God, a freewill offering, which thou have promised with thy mouth.
When thou come into thy neighbor's vineyard, then thou may eat thy fill of grapes at thine own pleasure, but thou shall not put any in thy vessel.
When thou come into thy neighbor's standing grain, then thou may pluck the ears with thy hand, but thou shall not move a sickle to thy neighbor's standing grain.

When a man takes a wife, and marries her, then it shall be, if she finds no favor in his eyes, because he has found some unseemly thing in her, that he shall write her a bill of divorcement, and give it in her hand, and send her out of his house.
And when she has departed out of his house, she may go and be another man's.
And if the latter husband dislikes her, and writes her a bill of divorcement, and gives it in her hand, and sends her out of his house, or if the latter husband dies, who took her to be his wife,
her former husband, who sent her away, may not take her again to be his wife after she is defiled. For that is abomination before Jehovah, and thou shall not cause the land to sin, which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance.
When a man takes a new wife, he shall not go out in the army, neither shall he be charged with any business. He shall be free at home one year, and shall cheer his wife whom he has taken.
No man shall take the mill or the upper millstone to pledge, for he takes life to pledge.
If a man is found stealing any of his brothers of the sons of Israel, and he deals with him harshly, or sells him, then that thief shall die. So shall thou put away the evil from the midst of thee.
Take heed in the disease of leprosy, that thou observe diligently, and do according to all that the priests the Levites shall teach you. As I commanded them, so ye shall observe to do.
Remember what Jehovah thy God did to Miriam by the way as ye came forth out of Egypt.
When thou do lend thy neighbor any manner of loan, thou shall not go into his house to fetch his pledge.
Thou shall stand outside, and the man to whom thou lend shall bring forth the pledge outside to thee.
And if he is a poor man, thou shall not sleep with his pledge.
Thou shall surely restore to him the pledge when the sun goes down, that he may sleep in his garment, and bless thee. And it shall be righteousness to thee before Jehovah thy God.
Thou shall not oppress a hired servant who is poor and needy, whether he be of thy brothers, or of thy sojourners that are in thy land within thy gates.
Thou shall give him his hire in his day, neither shall the sun go down upon it, for he is poor, and sets his heart upon it, lest he cry against thee to Jehovah, and it be sin to thee.
The fathers shall not be put to death for the sons, neither shall the sons be put to death for the fathers. Every man shall be put to death for his own sin.
Thou shall not distort the justice due to the sojourner, or to the fatherless, nor take the widow's raiment to pledge,
but thou shall remember that thou were a bondman in Egypt, and Jehovah thy God redeemed thee from there. Therefore I command thee to do this thing.
When thou reap thy harvest in thy field, and have forgotten a sheaf in the field, thou shall not go again to fetch it. It shall be for the sojourner, for the fatherless, and for the widow, that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in all the work of thy hands.
When thou beat thine olive tree, thou shall not go over the boughs again. It shall be for the sojourner, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
When thou gather of thy vineyard, thou shall not glean it behind thee. It shall be for the sojourner, for the fatherless, and for the widow.
And thou shall remember that thou were a bondman in the land of Egypt. Therefore I command thee to do this thing.

If there be a controversy between men, and they come to judgment, and they judge them, then they shall justify the righteous, and condemn the iniquitous.
And it shall be, if the iniquitous man is deserving to be beaten, that the judge shall cause him to lie down, and to be beaten before his face, according to his iniquity, by number.
He may give him forty stripes. He shall not exceed, lest, if he should exceed, and beat him above these with many stripes, then thy brother should seem debased to thee.
Thou shall not muzzle the ox when he treads out the grain.
If brothers dwell together, and one of them dies, and has no son, the wife of the dead man shall not be married outside to a stranger. Her husband's brother shall go in to her, and take her to him to wife, and perform the duty of a husband's brother to her.
And it shall be, that the firstborn who she bears shall succeed in the name of his brother who is dead, that his name be not blotted out of Israel.
And if the man does not want to take his brother's wife, then his brother's wife shall go up to the gate to the elders, and say, My husband's brother refuses to raise up to his brother a name in Israel. He will not perform the duty of a husband's brother to me.
Then the elders of his city shall call him, and speak to him. And if he stands, and says, I do not want to take her,
then his brother's wife shall come to him in the presence of the elders, and loose his shoe from off his foot, and spit in his face. And she shall answer and say, So shall it be done to the man who does not build up his brother's house.
And his name shall be called in Israel, The house of him who has his shoe loosed.
When men strive together one with another, and the wife of the one draws near to deliver her husband out of the hand of him who smites him, and puts forth her hand, and takes him by the privates,
then thou shall cut off her hand. Thine eye shall have no pity.
Thou shall not have in thy bag diverse weights, a great and a small.
Thou shall not have in thy house diverse measures, a great and a small.
A perfect and just weight thou shall have, a perfect and just measure thou shall have, that thy days may be long in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
For all who do such things, even all who do unrighteously, are an abomination to Jehovah thy God.
Remember what Amalek did to thee by the way as ye came forth out of Egypt,
how he met thee by the way, and smote the hindmost of thee, all who were feeble behind thee, when thou were faint and weary, and he feared not God.
Therefore it shall be, when Jehovah thy God has given thee rest from all thine enemies round about, in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance to possess it, that thou shall blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under heaven. Thou shall not forget.

And it shall be, when thou have come in to the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee for an inheritance, and possess it, and dwell in it,
that thou shall take of the first of all the fruit of the ground, which thou shall bring in from thy land that Jehovah thy God gives thee, and thou shall put it in a basket, and shall go to the place which Jehovah thy God shall choose to cause his name to dwell there.
And thou shall come to the priest who shall be in those days, and say to him, I profess this day to Jehovah thy God, that I have come to the land which Jehovah swore to our fathers to give us.
And the priest shall take the basket out of thy hand, and set it down before the altar of Jehovah thy God.
And thou shall answer and say before Jehovah thy God, My father was a Syrian ready to perish, and he went down into Egypt, and sojourned there, few in number. And he became there a nation, great, mighty, and populous.
And the Egyptians dealt ill with us, and afflicted us, and laid upon us hard bondage.
And we cried to Jehovah, the God of our fathers, and Jehovah heard our voice, and saw our affliction, and our toil, and our oppression.
And Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terribleness, and with signs, and with wonders.
And he has brought us into this place, and has given us this land, a land flowing with milk and honey.
And now, behold, I have brought the first of the fruit of the ground, which thou, O Jehovah, have given me. And thou shall set it down before Jehovah thy God, and worship before Jehovah thy God.
And thou shall rejoice in all the good which Jehovah thy God has given to thee, and to thy house, thou, and the Levite, and the sojourner who is in the midst of thee.
When thou have made an end of tithing all the tithe of thine increase in the third year, which is the year of tithing, then thou shall give it to the Levite, to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, that they may eat within thy gates, and be filled.
And thou shall say before Jehovah thy God, I have put away the hallowed things out of my house, and also have given them to the Levite, and to the sojourner, to the fatherless, and to the widow, according to all thy commandment which thou have commanded me. I have not transgressed any of thy commandments, neither have I forgotten them.
I have not eaten of it in my mourning, neither have I put away from it, being unclean, nor given of it for the dead. I have hearkened to the voice of Jehovah my God. I have done according to all that thou have commanded me.
Look down from thy holy habitation, from heaven, and bless thy people Israel, and the ground which thou have given us, as thou swore to our fathers, a land flowing with milk and honey.
This day Jehovah thy God commands thee to do these statutes and ordinances. Thou shall therefore keep and do them with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.
Thou have avouched Jehovah this day to be thy God, and that thou would walk in his ways, and keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his ordinances, and hearken to his voice.
And Jehovah has avouched thee this day to be a people for his own possession, as he has promised thee, and that thou should keep all his commandments,
and to make thee high above all nations that he has made, in praise, and in name, and in honor, and that thou may be a holy people to Jehovah thy God, as he has spoken.

And Moses and the elders of Israel commanded the people, saying, Keep all the commandment which I command you this day.
And it shall be on the day when ye shall pass over the Jordan to the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee, that thou shall set up for thee great stones, and plaster them with plaster.
And thou shall write upon them all the words of this law when thou have passed over, that thou may go in to the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, as Jehovah, the God of thy fathers, has promised thee.
And it shall be, when ye have passed over the Jordan, that ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this day, in mount Ebal, and thou shall plaster them with plaster.
And there thou shall build an altar to Jehovah thy God, an altar of stones. Thou shall lift up no iron upon them.
Thou shall build the altar of Jehovah thy God of unhewn stones. And thou shall offer burnt offerings on it to Jehovah thy God.
And thou shall sacrifice peace offerings, and shall eat there, and thou shall rejoice before Jehovah thy God.
And thou shall write upon the stones all the words of this law very plainly.
And Moses and the priests the Levites spoke to all Israel, saying, Keep silence, and hearken, O Israel. This day thou have become the people of Jehovah thy God.
Thou shall therefore obey the voice of Jehovah thy God, and do his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day.
And Moses charged the people the same day, saying,
Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin.
Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali.
And the Levites shall answer, and say to all the men of Israel with a loud voice,
Cursed be the man who makes a graven or molten image, an abomination to Jehovah, the work of the hands of the craftsman, and sets it up in secret. And all the people shall answer and say, Truly.
Cursed be he who dishonors his father or his mother. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed be he who removes his neighbor's landmark. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed be he who makes the blind to wander out of the way. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed be he who distorts the justice to the sojourner, fatherless, and widow. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed be he who lies with his father's wife, because he has uncovered his father's skirt. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed be he who lies with any manner of beast. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed be he who lies with his sister, the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed be he who lies with his mother-in-law. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed be he who smites his neighbor in secret. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed be he who takes a bribe to kill an innocent man. And all the people shall say, Truly.
Cursed is every man who does not continue in all the words of this law to do them. And all the people shall say, Truly.

And it shall come to pass, if thou shall hearken diligently to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to observe to do all his commandments which I command thee this day, that Jehovah thy God will set thee on high above all the nations of the earth,
Blessed shall thou be in the city, and blessed shall thou be in the field.
Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy beasts, the increase of thy cattle, and the young of thy flock.
Blessed shall be thy basket and thy kneading-trough.
Blessed shall thou be when thou come in, and blessed shall thou be when thou go out.
Jehovah will cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be smitten before thee. They shall come out against thee one way, and shall flee before thee seven ways.
Jehovah will command the blessing upon thee in thy barns, and in all that thou put thy hand to. And he will bless thee in the land which Jehovah thy God gives thee.
Jehovah will establish thee for a holy people to himself, as he has sworn to thee, if thou shall keep the commandments of Jehovah thy God, and walk in his ways.
And all the peoples of the earth shall see that thou are called by the name of Jehovah, and they shall be afraid of thee.
And Jehovah will make thee plenteous for good, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, in the land which Jehovah swore to thy fathers to give thee.
Jehovah will open to thee his good treasure the heavens, to give the rain of thy land in its season, and to bless all the work of thy hand. And thou shall lend to many nations, and thou shall not borrow.
And Jehovah will make thee the head, and not the tail. And thou shall only be above, and thou shall not be beneath, if thou shall hearken to the commandments of Jehovah thy God, which I command thee this day, to observe and to do,
and shall not turn aside from any of the words which I command you this day, to the right hand, or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them.
Cursed shall thou be in the city, and cursed shall thou be in the field.
Cursed shall be thy basket and thy kneading-trough.
Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, the increase of thy cattle, and the young of thy flock.
Cursed shall thou be when thou come in, and cursed shall thou be when thou go out.
Jehovah will send upon thee cursing, discomfiture, and rebuke, in all that thou put thy hand to do, until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly, because of the evil of thy doings, by which thou have forsaken me.
Jehovah will make the pestilence cling to thee, until he has consumed thee from off the land, where thou go in to possess it.
Jehovah will smite thee with consumption, and with fever, and with inflammation, and with fiery heat, and with the sword, and with blight, and with mildew. And they shall pursue thee until thou perish.
And thy sky that is over thy head shall be brass, and the earth that is under thee shall be iron.
Jehovah will make the rain of thy land powder and dust. From the sky it shall come down upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
Jehovah will cause thee to be smitten before thine enemies. Thou shall go out one way against them, and shall flee seven ways before them. And thou shall be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth.
And thy dead body shall be food to all birds of the sky, and to the beasts of the earth, and there shall be none to frighten them away.
Jehovah will smite thee with the boil of Egypt, and with the emerods, and with the scurvy, and with the itch, of which thou cannot be healed.
Jehovah will smite thee with madness, and with blindness, and with confusion of mind,
and thou shall grope at noonday, as the blind man gropes in darkness. And thou shall not prosper in thy ways. And thou shall only be oppressed and robbed always, and there shall be none to save thee.
Thou shall betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her. Thou shall build a house, and thou shall not dwell in it. Thou shall plant a vineyard, and shall not use the fruit of it.
Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shall not eat of it. Thy donkey shall be violently taken away from before thy face, and shall not be restored to thee. Thy sheep shall be given to thine enemies, and thou shall have none to save thee.
Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given to another people. And thine eyes shall look, and fail with longing for them all the day, and there shall be nothing in the power of thy hand.
The fruit of thy ground, and all thy labors, shall a nation eat up which thou know not. And thou shall only be oppressed and crushed always,
so that thou shall be mad because of the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see.
Jehovah will smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a sore boil, of which thou cannot be healed, from the sole of thy foot to the crown of thy head.
Jehovah will bring thee, and thy king whom thou shall set over thee, to a nation that thou have not known, thou nor thy fathers. And there thou shall serve other gods, wood and stone.
And thou shall become an astonishment, a proverb, and a byword, among all the peoples where Jehovah shall lead thee away.
Thou shall carry much seed out into the field, and shall gather little in, for the locust shall consume it.
Thou shall plant vineyards and dress them, but thou shall neither drink of the wine, nor gather, for the worm shall eat them.
Thou shall have olive trees throughout all thy borders, but thou shall not anoint thyself with the oil, for thine olive shall drop off.
Thou shall beget sons and daughters, but they shall not be thine, for they shall go into captivity.
All thy trees and the fruit of thy ground shall the locust possess.
The sojourner who is in the midst of thee shall mount up above thee higher and higher, and thou shall come down lower and lower.
He shall lend to thee, and thou shall not lend to him. He shall be the head, and thou shall be the tail.
And all these curses shall come upon thee, and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee, till thou be destroyed, because thou hearkened not to the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee,
and they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder, and upon thy seed forever.
Because thou served not Jehovah thy God with joyfulness, and with gladness of heart, by reason of the abundance of all things,
therefore thou shall serve thine enemies that Jehovah shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all things. And he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck, until he has destroyed thee.
Jehovah will bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the earth, as the eagle flies, a nation whose tongue thou shall not understand,
a nation of fierce countenance, that shall not regard the person of the old, nor show favor to the young,
and shall eat the fruit of thy cattle, and the fruit of thy ground, until thou be destroyed, that also shall not leave thee grain, new wine, or oil, the increase of thy cattle, or the young of thy flock, until they have caused thee to perish.
And they shall besiege thee in all thy gates, until thy high and fortified walls come down, in which thou trusted, throughout all thy land. And they shall besiege thee in all thy gates throughout all thy land, which Jehovah thy God has given thee.
And thou shall eat the fruit of thine own body, the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, whom Jehovah thy God has given thee, in the siege and in the distress with which thine enemies shall distress thee.
The man who is tender among you, and very delicate, his eye shall be evil toward his brother, and toward the wife of his bosom, and toward the remnant of his sons whom he has remaining,
so that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his sons whom he shall eat, because he has nothing left to him, in the siege and in the distress with which thine enemy shall distress thee in all thy gates.
The tender and delicate woman among you, who would not adventure to set the sole of her foot upon the ground for delicateness and tenderness, her eye shall be evil toward the husband of her bosom, and toward her son, and toward her daughter,
and toward her young one who comes out from between her feet, and toward her sons whom she shall bear, for she shall eat them secretly for want of all things, in the siege and in the distress with which thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates.
If thou will not observe to do all the words of this law that are written in this book, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful name, JEHOVAH THY GOD,
then Jehovah will make thy calamities extraordinary, and the calamities of thy seed, even great calamities and of long continuance, and severe sicknesses and of long continuance.
And he will bring upon thee again all the diseases of Egypt, which thou were afraid of, and they shall cling to thee.
Also every sickness, and every calamity, which is not written in the book of this law, them Jehovah will bring upon thee, until thou be destroyed.
And ye shall be left few in number, whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude, because thou did not hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God.
And it shall come to pass, that, as Jehovah rejoiced over you to do you good, and to multiply you, so Jehovah will rejoice over you to cause you to perish, and to destroy you. And ye shall be plucked from off the land where thou go in to possess it.
And Jehovah will scatter thee among all peoples, from the one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth. And there thou shall serve other gods, which thou have not known, thou nor thy fathers, even wood and stone.
And among these nations thou shall find no ease, and there shall be no rest for the sole of thy foot, but Jehovah will give thee there a trembling heart, and failing of eyes, and pining of soul.
And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee, and thou shall fear night and day, and shall have no assurance of thy life.
In the morning thou shall say, Would it were evening! and at evening thou shall say, Would it were morning! for the fear of thy heart which thou shall fear, and for the sight of thine eyes which thou shall see.
And Jehovah will bring thee into Egypt again with ships, by the way of which I said to thee, Thou shall see it no more again. And there ye shall sell yourselves to your enemies for bondmen and for bondwomen, and no man shall buy you.

These are the words of the covenant which Jehovah commanded Moses to make with the sons of Israel in the land of Moab, besides the covenant which he made with them in Horeb.
And Moses called to all Israel, and said to them, Ye have seen all that Jehovah did before your eyes in the land of Egypt to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land,
the great trials which thine eyes saw, the signs, and those great wonders,
yet Jehovah has not given you a heart to know, and eyes to see, and ears to hear, to this day.
And I have led you forty years in the wilderness. Your clothes have not grown old upon you, and thy shoe has not grown old upon thy foot.
Ye have not eaten bread, neither have ye drunk wine or strong drink, that ye may know that I am Jehovah your God.
And when ye came to this place, Sihon the king of Heshbon, and Og the king of Bashan, came out against us to battle, and we smote them.
And we took their land, and gave it for an inheritance to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half-tribe of the Manassites.
Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do.
Ye stand this day all of you before Jehovah your God-your heads, your tribes, your elders, and your officers, even all the men of Israel,
your little ones, your wives, and thy sojourner who is in the midst of thy camps, from the hewer of thy wood to the drawer of thy water-
that thou may enter into the covenant of Jehovah thy God, and into his oath, which Jehovah thy God makes with thee this day,
that he may establish thee this day to himself for a people, and that he may be to thee a God, as he spoke to thee, and as he swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob.
Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath,
but with him who stands here with us this day before Jehovah our God, and also with him who is not here with us this day
(for ye know how we dwelt in the land of Egypt, and how we came through the midst of the nations through which ye passed,
and ye have seen their abominations, and their idols, wood and stone, silver and gold, which were among them).
Lest there should be among you man, or woman, or family, or tribe, whose heart turns away this day from Jehovah our God, to go to serve the gods of those nations. Lest there should be among you a root that bears gall and wormwood,
and it comes to pass, when he hears the words of this curse, that he blesses himself in his heart, saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the stubbornness of my heart, to destroy the moist with the dry.
Jehovah will not pardon him, but then the anger of Jehovah and his jealousy will smoke against that man, and all the curse that is written in this book shall lie upon him, and Jehovah will blot out his name from under heaven.
And Jehovah will set him apart to evil out of all the tribes of Israel, according to all the curses of the covenant that is written in this book of the law.
And the generation to come, your sons who shall rise up after you, and the foreigner who shall come from a far land, shall say, when they see the calamities of that land, and the sicknesses with which Jehovah has made it sick.
The whole land of it is brimstone, and salt, a burning. It is not sown, nor bears, nor any grass grows in it, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboiim, which Jehovah overthrew in his anger, and in his wrath,
even all the nations shall say, Why has Jehovah done thus to this land? What is the meaning of the heat of this great anger?
Then men shall say, Because they forsook the covenant of Jehovah, the God of their fathers, which he made with them when he brought them forth out of the land of Egypt,
and went and served other gods, and worshiped them, gods that they knew not, and that he had not given to them.
Therefore the anger of Jehovah was kindled against this land, to bring upon it all the curse that is written in this book.
And Jehovah rooted them out of their land in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation, and cast them into another land, as at this day.
The secret things belong to Jehovah our God, but the things that are revealed belong to us and to our sons forever, that we may do all the words of this law.

And it shall come to pass, when all these things have come upon thee, the blessing and the curse, which I have set before thee, and thou shall call them to mind among all the nations, where Jehovah thy God has driven thee,
and shall return to Jehovah thy God, and shall obey his voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou and thy sons, with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
that then Jehovah thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion upon thee, and will return and gather thee from all the peoples where Jehovah thy God has scattered thee.
If any of thine outcasts be in the outermost parts of heaven, from there Jehovah thy God will gather thee, and from there he will fetch thee.
And Jehovah thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers possessed, and thou shall possess it, and he will do thee good, and multiply thee above thy fathers.
And Jehovah thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live.
And Jehovah thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies, and on those who hate thee, who persecuted thee.
And thou shall return and obey the voice of Jehovah, and do all his commandments which I command thee this day.
And Jehovah thy God will make thee plenteous in all the work of thy hand, in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy ground, for good. For Jehovah will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy fathers,
if thou shall obey the voice of Jehovah thy God, to keep his commandments and his statutes which are written in this book of the law; if thou turn to Jehovah thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul.
For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is not too hard for thee, neither is it far off.
It is not in heaven, that thou should say, Who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it to us, and make us to hear it, that we may do it?
Neither is it beyond the sea, that thou should say, Who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it to us, and make us to hear it, that we may do it?
But the word is very near to thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it.
See, I have set before thee this day life and good, and death and evil,
in that I command thee this day to love Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways, and to keep his commandments and his statutes and his ordinances, that thou may live and multiply, and that Jehovah thy God may bless thee in the land where thou go in to possess it.
But if thy heart turns away, and thou will not hear, but shall be drawn away, and worship other gods, and serve them,
I declare to you this day, that ye shall surely perish. Ye shall not prolong your days in the land where thou pass over the Jordan to go in to possess it.
I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day, that I have set before thee life and death, the blessing and the curse. Therefore choose life, that thou may live, thou and thy seed,
to love Jehovah thy God, to obey his voice, and to cling to him, for he is thy life, and the length of thy days, that thou may dwell in the land which Jehovah swore to thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them.

And Moses went and spoke these words to all Israel.
And he said to them, I am a hundred and twenty years old this day. I can no more go out and come in. And Jehovah has said to me, Thou shall not go over this Jordan.
Jehovah thy God, he will go over before thee. He will destroy these nations from before thee, and thou shall dispossess them. Joshua, he shall go over before thee, as Jehovah has spoken.
And Jehovah will do to them as he did to Sihon and to Og, the kings of the Amorites, and to their land, whom he destroyed.
And Jehovah will deliver them up before you, and ye shall do to them according to all the commandment which I have commanded you.
Be strong and of good courage, fear not, nor be frightened at them, for Jehovah thy God, he it is who goes with thee. He will not leave thee, nor forsake thee.
And Moses called to Joshua, and said to him in the sight of all Israel, Be strong and of good courage. For thou shall go with this people into the land which Jehovah has sworn to their fathers to give them, and thou shall cause them to inherit it.
And Jehovah, he it is who goes before thee. He will be with thee. He will not fail thee, nor forsake thee. Fear not, neither be dismayed.
And Moses wrote this law, and delivered it to the priests the sons of Levi, who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and to all the elders of Israel.
And Moses commanded them, saying, At the end of every seven years, in the set time of the year of release, in the feast of tabernacles,
when all Israel has come to appear before Jehovah thy God in the place which he shall choose, thou shall read this law before all Israel in their hearing.
Assemble the people, the men and the women and the little ones, and thy sojourner who is within thy gates, that they may hear, and that they may learn, and fear Jehovah your God, and observe to do all the words of this law,
and that their sons who have not known may hear, and learn to fear Jehovah your God as long as ye live in the land where ye go over the Jordan to possess it.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, thy days approach that thou must die. Call Joshua, and present yourselves in the tent of meeting, that I may give him a command. And Moses and Joshua went, and presented themselves in the tent of meeting.
And Jehovah appeared in the tent in a pillar of cloud, and the pillar of cloud stood over the door of the tent.
And Jehovah said to Moses, Behold, thou shall sleep with thy fathers. And this people will rise up, and play the harlot after the strange gods of the land where they go to be among them, and will forsake me, and break my covenant which I have made with them.
Then my anger shall be kindled against them in that day, and I will forsake them, and I will hide my face from them, and they shall be devoured, and many evils and troubles shall come upon them, so that they will say in that day, Have not these evils come upon us because our God is not among us?
And I will surely hide my face in that day for all the evil which they shall have wrought, in that they have turned to other gods.
Now therefore write ye this song for you, and teach thou it the sons of Israel. Put it in their mouths, that this song may be a witness for me against the sons of Israel.
For when I shall have brought them into the land which I swore to their fathers, flowing with milk and honey, and they shall have eaten and filled themselves, and grown fat, then they will turn to other gods, and serve them, and despise me, and break my covenant.
And it shall come to pass, when many evils and troubles have come upon them, that this song shall testify before them as a witness, for it shall not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed. For I know their imagination which they frame this day, before I have brought them into the land which I swore.
So Moses wrote this song the same day, and taught it to the sons of Israel.
And he gave Joshua the son of Nun a command, and said, Be strong and of good courage, for thou shall bring the sons of Israel into the land which I swore to them, and I will be with thee.
And it came to pass, when Moses had made an end of writing the words of this law in a book, until they were finished,
that Moses commanded the Levites, who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, saying,
Take this book of the law, and put it by the side of the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, that it may be there for a witness against thee.
For I know thy rebellion, and thy stiff neck. Behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious against Jehovah, and how much more after my death?
Assemble to me all the elders of your tribes, and your officers, that I may speak these words in their ears, and call heaven and earth to witness against them.
For I know that after my death ye will utterly corrupt yourselves, and turn aside from the way which I have commanded you. And evil will befall you in the latter days, because ye will do that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger through the work of your hands.

Give ear, ye heavens, and I will speak, and let the earth hear the words of my mouth.
My doctrine shall drop as the rain. My speech shall distil as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender grass, and as the showers upon the herb.
For I will proclaim the name of Jehovah. Ascribe ye greatness to our God.
The Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are justice, a God of faithfulness and without iniquity, just and right is he.
They have dealt corruptly with him. They are not his sons, it is their blemish, a perverse and crooked generation.
Do ye thus requite Jehovah, O foolish people and unwise? Is not he thy father who has bought thee? He has made thee, and established thee.
Remember the days of old. Consider the years of many generations. Ask thy father, and he will show thee, thine elders, and they will tell thee.
When the Most High gave to the nations their inheritance, when he separated the sons of men, he set the bounds of the peoples according to the number of the sons of Israel.
For Jehovah's portion is his people. Jacob is the lot of his inheritance.
He found him in a desert land, and in the waste howling wilderness. He compassed him about. He cared for him. He kept him as the apple of his eye.
As an eagle that stirs up her nest, that flutters over her young, he spread abroad his wings. He took them. He bore them on his pinions.
Jehovah alone led him, and there was no foreign god with him.
He made him ride on the high places of the earth, and he ate the increase of the field, and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the flinty rock,
butter of the herd, and milk of the flock, with fat of lambs, and rams of the breed of Bashan, and goats, with the finest of the wheat, and of the blood of the grape thou drank wine.
But Jeshurun grew fat, and kicked. Thou have grown fat. Thou have grown thick. Thou have become sleek. Then he forsook God who made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock of his salvation.
They moved him to jealousy with strange gods. With abominations they provoked him to anger.
They sacrificed to demons, not God, to gods that they knew not, to new gods that came up of late, which your fathers did not dread.
Thou are unmindful of the Rock that begot thee, and have forgotten God who gave thee birth.
And Jehovah saw, and abhorred, because of the provocation of his sons and his daughters.
And he said, I will hide my face from them. I will see what their end shall be. For they are a very perverse generation, sons in whom is no faithfulness.
They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God. They have provoked me to anger with their vanities, and I will move them to jealousy with a non-nation. I will provoke them to anger with a foolish nation.
For a fire is kindled in my anger, and burns to the lowest Sheol, and devours the earth with its increase, and sets on fire the foundations of the mountains.
I will heap evils upon them. I will spend my arrows upon them,
to be wasted with hunger, and devoured with burning heat and bitter destruction. And I will send upon them the teeth of beasts, with the poison of crawling things of the dust.
Outside the sword shall bereave, and in the chambers terror, to both young man and virgin, the suckling with the man of gray hairs.
I said, I would scatter them afar, I would make the remembrance of them to cease from among men,
were it not that I feared the provocation of the enemy, lest their adversaries should judge amiss, lest they should say, Our hand is exalted, and Jehovah has not done all this.
For they are a nation void of counsel, and there is no understanding in them.
Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end!
How should one chase a thousand, and two put ten thousand to flight unless their Rock had sold them, and Jehovah had delivered them up?
For their rock is not as our Rock, even our enemies themselves being judges.
For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah. Their grapes are grapes of gall, their clusters are bitter.
Their wine is the poison of serpents, and the cruel venom of asps.
Is not this laid up in store with me, sealed up among my treasures?
Vengeance is for me, and recompense at the time when their foot shall slide. For the day of their calamity is at hand, and the things that are to come upon them shall make haste.
For Jehovah will judge his people, and regrets for his servants, when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none remaining, shut up or left at large.
And he will say, Where are their gods, the rock in which they took refuge,
which ate the fat of their sacrifices, and drank the wine of their drink offering? Let them rise up and help you, let them be your protection.
See now that I, even I, am he, and there is no god with me. I kill, and I make alive. I wound, and I heal. And there is none that can deliver out of my hand.
For I lift up my hand to heaven, and say, As I live forever,
if I whet my glittering sword, and my hand takes hold on judgment, I will render vengeance to my adversaries, and will recompense those who hate me.
I will make my arrows drunk with blood, and my sword shall devour flesh, with the blood of the slain and the captives, from the head of the leaders of the enemy.
Rejoice, O ye Gentiles, with his people. For he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will recompense those who hate him, and will make expiation for his land, for his people.
And Moses came and spoke all the words of this song in the ears of the people, he and Joshua the son of Nun.
And Moses made an end of speaking all these words to all Israel.
And he said to them, Set your heart to all the words which I testify to you this day, which ye shall command your sons to observe to do, even all the words of this law.
For it is no vain thing for you, because it is your life, and through this thing ye shall prolong your days in the land where ye go over the Jordan to possess it.
And Jehovah spoke to Moses that selfsame day, saying,
Get thee up onto this mountain of Abarim, to mount Nebo, which is in the land of Moab, that is opposite Jericho, and behold the land of Canaan, which I give to the sons of Israel for a possession.
And die on the mount where thou go up, and be gathered to thy people, as Aaron thy brother died in mount Hor, and was gathered to his people,
because ye trespassed against me in the midst of the sons of Israel at the waters of Meribah of Kadesh, in the wilderness of Zin, because ye did not sanctify me in the midst of the sons of Israel.
For thou shall see the land before thee, but thou shall not go there into the land which I give the sons of Israel.

And this is the blessing with which Moses the man of God blessed the sons of Israel before his death.
And he said, Jehovah came from Sinai, and rose from Seir to them. He shined forth from mount Paran, and he came from the ten thousands of holy ones. At his right hand was a fiery law for them.
Yea, he loves the people. All his sanctified are in thy hand, and they sat down at thy feet. He shall receive from thy words.
Moses commanded for us a law, an inheritance for the assembly of Jacob.
And he was king in Jeshurun when the heads of the people were gathered, all the tribes of Israel together.
Let Reuben live, and not die, nor let his men be few.
And he said, Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah, and bring him into his people. With his hands he contended for himself, and thou shall be a help against his adversaries.
And of Levi he said, Thy Thummim and thy Urim are with thy holy man, whom thou proved at Massah, with whom thou strove at the waters of Meribah,
who said of his father, and of his mother, I have not seen him, neither did he acknowledge his brothers, nor knew he his own sons, for they have observed thy word, and keep thy covenant.
They shall teach Jacob thine ordinances, and Israel thy law. They shall put incense before thee, and whole burnt offering upon thine altar.
Bless, Jehovah, his substance, and accept the work of his hands. Smite through the loins of those who rise up against him, and of those who hate him, that they not rise again.
Of Benjamin he said, The beloved of Jehovah shall dwell in safety by him. He covers him all the day long, and he dwells between his shoulders.
And of Joseph he said, Blessed of Jehovah be his land, for the precious things of heaven, for the dew, and for the deep that couches beneath,
and for the precious things of the fruits of the sun, and for the precious things of the growth of the moons,
and for the chief things of the ancient mountains, and for the precious things of the everlasting hills,
and for the precious things of the earth and the fullness of it, and the good will of him who dwelt in the bush. Let it come upon the head of Joseph, and upon the crown of the head of him who was separate from his brothers.
The firstling of his herd, majesty is his. And his horns are the horns of the wild-ox. With them he shall push the peoples, all of them, even the ends of the earth. And they are the ten thousands of Ephraim, and they are the thousands of Manasseh.
And of Zebulun he said, Rejoice, Zebulun, in thy going out, and, Issachar, in thy tents.
They shall call the peoples to the mountain. There they shall offer sacrifices of righteousness, for they shall suck the abundance of the seas, and the hidden treasures of the sand.
And of Gad he said, Blessed be he who enlarges Gad. He dwells as a lioness, and tears the arm, yea, the crown of the head.
And he provided the first part for himself, for there was the lawgiver's portion reserved. And he came with the heads of the people. He executed the righteousness of Jehovah, and his ordinances with Israel.
And of Dan he said, Dan is a lion's whelp that leaps forth from Bashan.
And of Naphtali he said, O Naphtali, satisfied with favor, and full with the blessing of Jehovah, possess thou the west and the south.
And of Asher he said, Blessed be Asher with sons. Let him be acceptable to his brothers, and let him dip his foot in oil.
Thy bars shall be iron and brass, and as thy days, so shall thy strength be.
There is none like God, O Jeshurun, who rides upon the heavens for thy help, and in his excellency on the skies.
The eternal God is thy dwelling-place, and underneath are the everlasting arms. And he thrust out the enemy from before thee, and said, Destroy.
And Israel dwells in safety, the fountain of Jacob alone, in a land of grain and new wine. Yea, his heavens drop down dew.
Happy are thou, O Israel. Who is like thee, a people saved by Jehovah, the shield of thy help, and the sword of thy excellency! And thine enemies shall submit themselves to thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places.

And Moses went up from the plains of Moab to mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah, that is opposite Jericho. And Jehovah showed him all the land of Gilead, to Dan,
and all Naphtali, and the land of Ephraim and Manasseh, and all the land of Judah, to the farther sea,
and the South, and the Plain of the valley of Jericho the city of palm trees, to Zoar.
And Jehovah said to him, This is the land which I swore to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, I will give it to thy seed. I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shall not go over there.
So Moses the servant of Jehovah died there in the land of Moab, according to the word of Jehovah.
And he buried him in the valley in the land of Moab opposite Beth-peor, but no man knows of his sepulcher to this day.
And Moses was a hundred and twenty years old when he died. His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated.
And the sons of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab thirty days. So the days of weeping and mourning for Moses were ended.
And Joshua the son of Nun was full of the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him. And the sons of Israel hearkened to him, and did as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And there has not arisen a prophet since in Israel like Moses, whom Jehovah knew face to face,
in all the signs and the wonders, which Jehovah sent him to do in the land of Egypt, to Pharaoh, and to all his servants, and to all his land,
and in all the mighty hand, and in all the great terror, which Moses wrought in the sight of all Israel.

Joshua

Now it came to pass after the death of Moses the servant of Jehovah, that Jehovah spoke to Joshua the son of Nun, Moses' minister, saying,
Moses my servant is dead. Now therefore arise, go over this Jordan, thou, and all this people, to the land which I give to them, even to the sons of Israel.
Every place that the sole of your foot shall tread upon, to you I have given it, as I spoke to Moses.
From the wilderness, and this Lebanon, even to the great river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the Hittites, and to the great sea toward the going down of the sun, shall be your border.
There shall not any man be able to stand before thee all the days of thy life. As I was with Moses, so I will be with thee. I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee.
Be strong and of good courage, for thou shall cause this people to inherit the land which I swore to their fathers to give them.
Only be strong and very courageous to observe to do according to all the law, which Moses my servant commanded thee. Turn not from it to the right hand or to the left, that thou may have good success wherever thou go.
This book of the law shall not depart out of thy mouth, but thou shall meditate on it day and night, that thou may observe to do according to all that is written in it, for then thou shall make thy way prosperous, and then thou shall have good success.
Have I not commanded thee? Be strong and of good courage. Be not frightened, neither be thou dismayed, for Jehovah thy God is with thee wherever thou go.
Then Joshua commanded the officers of the people, saying,
Pass through the midst of the camp, and command the people, saying, Prepare food for you, for within three days ye are to pass over this Jordan to go in to possess the land, which Jehovah your God gives you to possess it.
And to the Reubenites, and to the Gadites, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joshua spoke, saying,
Remember the word which Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, saying, Jehovah your God gives you rest, and will give you this land.
Your wives, your little ones, and your cattle, shall abide in the land which Moses gave you beyond the Jordan, but ye shall pass over before your brothers armed, all the mighty men of valor, and shall help them
until Jehovah has given your brothers rest, as you, and they also have possessed the land which Jehovah your God gives them. Then ye shall return to the land of your possession, and possess it, which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you beyond the Jordan toward the sunrise.
And they answered Joshua, saying, All that thou have commanded us we will do, and wherever thou send us we will go.
According as we hearkened to Moses in all things, so will we hearken to thee. Only Jehovah thy God be with thee, as he was with Moses.
Whoever he is who shall rebel against thy commandment, and shall not hearken to thy words in all that thou command him, he shall be put to death. Only be strong and of good courage.

And Joshua the son of Nun sent out of Shittim two men as spies secretly, saying, Go, view the land, and Jericho. And they went and came into the house of a harlot whose name was Rahab, and lay down there.
And it was told the king of Jericho, saying, Behold, men came in here tonight of the sons of Israel to search out the land.
And the king of Jericho sent to Rahab, saying, Bring forth the men who came to thee, who have entered into thy house, for they have come to search out all the land.
And the woman took the two men, and hid them. And she said, Yes, the men came to me, but I did not know from where they were.
And it came to pass about the time of the shutting of the gate, when it was dark, that the men went out. Where the men went I know not. Pursue after them quickly, for ye will overtake them.
But she had brought them up to the roof, and hid them with the stalks of flax, which she had laid in order upon the roof.
And the men pursued after them the way to the Jordan to the fords, and as soon as those who pursued after them were gone out, they shut the gate.
And before they were laid down, she came up to them upon the roof.
And she said to the men, I know that Jehovah has given you the land, and that the fear of you has fallen upon us. And that all the inhabitants of the land melt away before you.
For we have heard how Jehovah dried up the water of the Red Sea before you when ye came out of Egypt, and what ye did to the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, to Sihon and to Og, whom ye utterly destroyed.
And as soon as we had heard it, our hearts melted, neither did there remain any more spirit in any man because of you, for Jehovah your God, he is God in heaven above, and on earth beneath.
Now therefore, I pray you, swear to me by Jehovah, since I have dealt kindly with you, that ye also will deal kindly with my father's house, and give me a true token,
and that ye will save alive my father, and my mother, and my brothers, and my sisters, and all that they have, and will deliver our lives from death.
And the men said to her, Our life for yours if ye do not utter this our business. And it shall be, when Jehovah gives us the land, that we will deal kindly and truly with thee.
Then she let them down by a cord through the window, for her house was upon the side of the wall, and she dwelt upon the wall.
And she said to them, Get you to the mountain lest the pursuers come upon you. And hide yourselves there three days, until the pursuers be returned, and afterward ye may go your way.
And the men said to her, We will be guiltless of this thine oath which thou have made us to swear.
Behold, when we come into the land, thou shall bind this line of scarlet cord in the window which thou let us down by. And thou shall gather to thee into the house thy father, and thy mother, and thy brothers, and all thy father's household.
And it shall be, that whoever shall go out of the doors of thy house into the street, his blood shall be upon his head, and we shall be guiltless. And whoever shall be with thee in the house, his blood shall be on our head if any hand be upon him.
But if thou utter this our business, then we shall be guiltless of thine oath which thou have made us to swear.
And she said, According to your words, so be it. And she sent them away, and they departed. And she bound the scarlet line in the window.
And they went, and came to the mountain, and abode there three days, until the pursuers were returned. And the pursuers sought them throughout all the way, but did not find them.
Then the two men returned, and descended from the mountain, and passed over, and came to Joshua the son of Nun. And they told him all that had befallen them.
And they said to Joshua, Truly Jehovah has delivered into our hands all the land, and moreover all the inhabitants of the land melt away before us.

And Joshua rose up early in the morning. And they moved from Shittim, and came to the Jordan, he and all the sons of Israel, and they lodged there before they passed over.
And it came to pass after three days, that the officers went through the midst of the camp,
and they commanded the people, saying, When ye see the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God, and the priests the Levites bearing it, then ye shall move from your place, and go after it.
Yet there shall be a space between you and it, about two thousand cubits by measure. Do not come near to it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go, for ye have not passed this way heretofore.
And Joshua said to the people, Sanctify yourselves, for tomorrow Jehovah will do wonders among you.
And Joshua spoke to the priests, saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass over before the people. And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the people.
And Jehovah said to Joshua, This day I will begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I was with Moses, so I will be with thee.
And thou shall command the priests who bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye have come to the brink of the waters of the Jordan, ye shall stand still in the Jordan.
And Joshua said to the sons of Israel, Come here, and hear the words of Jehovah your God.
And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you, and that he will without fail drive out from before you the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Hivite, and the Perizzite, and the Girgashite, and the Amorite, and the Jebusite.
Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth passes over before you into the Jordan.
Now therefore take for you twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, for every tribe a man.
And it shall come to pass, when the soles of the feet of the priests who bear the ark of Jehovah, the Lord of all the earth, shall rest in the waters of the Jordan, that the waters of the Jordan shall be cut off, even the waters that come down from above, and they shall stand in one heap.
And it came to pass, when the people moved from their tents to pass over the Jordan-the priests who bore the ark of the covenant being before the people-
and when those who bore the ark came to the Jordan, and the feet of the priests who bore the ark were dipped in the brink of the water (for the Jordan overflows all its banks all the time of harvest),
that the waters which came down from above, stood, and rose up in one heap a great way off, at Adam, the city that is beside Zarethan, and those that went down toward the sea of the Arabah, even the Salt Sea, were wholly cut off. And the people passed over right against Jericho.
And the priests who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah stood firm on dry ground in the midst of the Jordan, and all Israel passed over on dry ground until all the nation were passed clean over the Jordan.

And it came to pass, when all the nation were clean passed over the Jordan, that Jehovah spoke to Joshua, saying,
Take for you twelve men out of the people, a man out of every tribe,
and command ye them, saying, Take for you here out of the midst of the Jordan, out of the place where the priests' feet stood firm, twelve stones, and carry them over with you, and lay them down in the lodging-place where ye shall lodge this night.
Then Joshua called the twelve men, whom he had prepared of the sons of Israel, a man out of every tribe.
And Joshua said to them, Pass over before the ark of Jehovah your God into the midst of the Jordan, and take ye up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel,
that this may be a sign among you, that, when your children ask in time to come, saying, What do ye mean by these stones?
Then ye shall say to them, Because the waters of the Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah. When it passed over the Jordan, the waters of the Jordan were cut off. And these stones shall be for a memorial to the sons of Israel forever.
And the sons of Israel did so as Joshua commanded, and took up twelve stones out of the midst of the Jordan, as Jehovah spoke to Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Israel, and they carried them over with them to the place where they lodged, and laid them down there.
And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of the Jordan, in the place where the feet of the priests who bore the ark of the covenant stood, and they are there to this day.
For the priests who bore the ark stood in the midst of the Jordan until everything was finished that Jehovah commanded Joshua to speak to the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua. And the people hastened and passed over.
And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over, that the ark of Jehovah passed over, and the priests, in the presence of the people.
And the sons of Reuben, and the sons of Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, passed over armed before the sons of Israel, as Moses spoke to them.
About forty thousand ready armed for war passed over before Jehovah to battle, to the plains of Jericho.
On that day Jehovah magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel, and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life.
And Jehovah spoke to Joshua, saying,
Command the priests who bear the ark of the testimony, that they come up out of the Jordan.
Joshua therefore commanded the priests, saying, Come ye up out of the Jordan.
And it came to pass, when the priests who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came up out of the midst of the Jordan, and the soles of the priests' feet were lifted up to the dry ground, that the waters of the Jordan returned to their place, and went over all its banks, as formerly.
And the people came up out of the Jordan on the tenth day of the first month, and encamped in Gilgal on the east border of Jericho.
And those twelve stones, which they took out of the Jordan, Joshua set up in Gilgal.
And he spoke to the sons of Israel, saying, When your sons shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What do these stones mean?
Then ye shall let your sons know, saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land.
For Jehovah your God dried up the waters of the Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as Jehovah your God did to the Red Sea, which he dried up from before us, until we were passed over,
that all the peoples of the earth may know the hand of Jehovah, that it is mighty, that ye may fear Jehovah your God forever.

And it came to pass, when all the kings of the Amorites, who were beyond the Jordan westward, and all the kings of the Canaanites, who were by the sea, heard how that Jehovah had dried up the waters of the Jordan from before the sons of Israel until we were passed over, that their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more, because of the sons of Israel.
At that time Jehovah said to Joshua, Make for thee knives of flint, and circumcise again the sons of Israel the second time.
And Joshua made him knives of flint, and circumcised the sons of Israel at the hill of the foreskins.
All the people who came forth out of Egypt, who were males, even all the men of war, died in the wilderness by the way after they came forth out of Egypt.
For all the people who came out were circumcised, but all the people who were born in the wilderness by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, they had not circumcised.
For the sons of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness till all the nation, even the men of war who came forth out of Egypt, were consumed, because they did not hearken to the voice of Jehovah, to whom Jehovah swore that he would not let them see the land which Jehovah swore to their fathers that he would give us, a land flowing with milk and honey.
And their sons, whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised, for they were uncircumcised because they had not circumcised them by the way.
And it came to pass, when they had done circumcising all the nation, that they abode in their places in the camp, till they were recovered.
And Jehovah said to Joshua, This day I have rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you. Therefore the name of that place was called Gilgal, to this day.
And the sons of Israel encamped in Gilgal. And they kept the Passover on the fourteenth day of the month at evening in the plains of Jericho.
And they ate of the produce of the land on the morrow after the Passover, unleavened cakes and parched grain, in the selfsame day.
And the manna ceased on the morrow, after they had eaten of the produce of the land. Neither had the sons of Israel manna any more, but they ate of the fruit of the land of Canaan that year.
And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man opposite him with his sword drawn in his hand. And Joshua went to him, and said to him, Are thou for us, or for our adversaries?
And he said, No, but as captain of the army of Jehovah I have now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and worshiped, and said to him, What does my lord say to his servant?
And the captain of Jehovah's army said to Joshua, Put off thy shoe from off thy foot, for the place on which thou stand is holy. And Joshua did so.

Now Jericho was shut up tight because of the sons of Israel. None went out, and none came in.
And Jehovah said to Joshua, See, I have given Jericho into thy hand, and the king of it, and the mighty men of valor.
And ye shall encompass the city, all the men of war, going around the city once. Thus shall thou do six days.
And seven priests shall bear seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark. And the seventh day ye shall encompass the city seven times, and the priests shall blow the trumpets.
And it shall be, that, when they make a long blast with the ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet, all the people shall shout with a great shout. And the wall of the city shall fall down flat, and the people shall go up every man straight before him.
And Joshua the son of Nun called the priests, and said to them, Take up the ark of the covenant, and let seven priests bear seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of Jehovah.
And they said to the people, Pass on, and encompass the city, and let the armed men pass on before the ark of Jehovah.
And it was so, that, when Joshua had spoken to the people, the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns before Jehovah passed on, and blew the trumpets. And the ark of the covenant of Jehovah followed them.
And the armed men went before the priests who blew the trumpets, and the rearward went behind the ark, the priests blowing the trumpets as they went.
And Joshua commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor let your voice be heard, neither shall any word proceed out of your mouth until the day I bid you shout. Then ye shall shout.
So he caused the ark of Jehovah to encompass the city, going around it once. And they came into the camp, and lodged in the camp.
And Joshua rose early in the morning, and the priests took up the ark of Jehovah.
And the seven priests bearing the seven trumpets of rams' horns before the ark of Jehovah went on continually, and blew the trumpets. And the armed men went before them, and the rearward came behind the ark of Jehovah, the priests blowing the trumpets as they went.
And the second day they encompassed the city once, and returned into the camp. So they did six days.
And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they rose early at the dawning of the day, and encompassed the city according to the same manner seven times. Only on that day they encompassed the city seven times.
And it came to pass at the seventh time, when the priests blew the trumpets, Joshua said to the people, Shout, for Jehovah has given you the city.
And the city shall be set apart, even it and all that is in it, to Jehovah. Only Rahab the harlot shall live, she and all who are with her in the house, because she hid the messengers that we sent.
But as for you, only keep yourselves from what is set apart, lest when ye have set it apart, ye take from what is set apart. So ye would make the camp of Israel accursed, and trouble it.
But all the silver, and gold, and vessels of brass and iron, are holy to Jehovah. They shall come into the treasury of Jehovah.
So the people shouted, and the priests blew the trumpets. And it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, that the people shouted with a great shout, and the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city.
And they utterly destroyed all that was in the city, both man and woman, both young and old, and ox, and sheep, and donkey, with the edge of the sword.
And Joshua said to the two men who had spied out the land, Go into the harlot's house, and bring out from there the woman, and all that she has, as ye swore to her.
And the young men, the spies, went in, and brought out Rahab, and her father, and her mother, and her brothers, and all that she had. They also brought out all her kindred, and they set them outside the camp of Israel.
And they burnt the city with fire, and all that was in it. Only the silver, and the gold, and the vessels of brass and of iron, they put into the treasury of the house of Jehovah.
But Joshua saved alive Rahab the harlot, and her father's household, and all that she had. And she dwelt in the midst of Israel to this day, because she hid the messengers whom Joshua sent to spy out Jericho.
And Joshua charged them with an oath at that time, saying, Cursed be the man before Jehovah who rises up and builds this city Jericho. With the loss of his firstborn he shall lay the foundation of it, and with the loss of his youngest son he shall set up the gates of it.
So Jehovah was with Joshua, and his fame was in all the land.

But the sons of Israel committed a trespass in what was set apart. For Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, took from what was set apart, and the anger of Jehovah was kindled against the sons of Israel.
And Joshua sent men from Jericho to Ai, which is beside Beth-aven, on the east side of Bethel, and spoke to them, saying, Go up and spy out the land. And the men went up and spied out Ai.
And they returned to Joshua, and said to him, Let not all the people go up, but let about two or three thousand men go up and smite Ai. Do not make all the people to toil there, for they are but few.
So there went up there of the people about three thousand men. And they fled before the men of Ai.
And the men of Ai smote of them about thirty-six men. And they chased them from before the gate even to Shebarim, and smote them at the descent. And the hearts of the people melted, and became as water.
And Joshua tore his clothes, and fell to the earth upon his face before the ark of Jehovah until the evening, he and the elders of Israel, and they put dust upon their heads.
And Joshua said, Alas, O lord Jehovah, why have thou at all brought this people over the Jordan, to deliver us into the hand of the Amorites, to cause us to perish? Would that we had been content and dwelt beyond the Jordan!
Oh, Lord, what shall I say after Israel has turned their backs before their enemies!
For the Canaanites and all the inhabitants of the land will hear of it, and will encompass us around, and cut off our name from the earth, and what will thou do for thy great name?
And Jehovah said to Joshua, Get thee up. Why are thou thus fallen upon thy face?
Israel has sinned. Yes, they have even transgressed my covenant which I commanded them. Yes, they have even taken from what was set apart, and have also stolen, and also dissembled. And they have even put it among their own stuff.
Therefore the sons of Israel cannot stand before their enemies. They turn their backs before their enemies because they have become accursed. I will not be with you any more unless ye destroy what was set apart from among you.
Up, sanctify the people, and say, Sanctify yourselves against tomorrow. For thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, There is what has been set apart in the midst of thee, O Israel. Thou cannot stand before thine enemies until ye take away the devoted thing from among you.
In the morning therefore ye shall be brought near by your tribes, and it shall be, that the tribe which Jehovah takes shall come near by families, and the family which Jehovah shall take shall come near by households, and the household which Jehovah shall take shall come near man by man.
And it shall be, that he who is taken with the devoted thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he has, because he has transgressed the covenant of Jehovah, and because he has wrought folly in Israel.
So Joshua rose up early in the morning, and brought Israel near by their tribes, and the tribe of Judah was taken.
And he brought near the family of Judah, and he took the family of the Zerahites. And he brought near the family of the Zerahites man by man, and Zabdi was taken.
And he brought near his household man by man, and Achan, the son of Carmi, the son of Zabdi, the son of Zerah, of the tribe of Judah, was taken.
And Joshua said to Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to Jehovah, the God of Israel, and make confession to him, and tell me now what thou have done. Hide it not from me.
When I saw among the spoil a goodly Babylonian mantle, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekels weight, then I coveted them, and took them. And, behold, they are hid in the ground in the midst of my tent, and the silver under it.
So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran to the tent. And, behold, it was hid in his tent, and the silver under it.
And they took them from the midst of the tent, and brought them to Joshua, and to all the sons of Israel, and they laid them down before Jehovah.
And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son of Zerah, and the silver, and the mantle, and the wedge of gold, and his sons, and his daughters, and his oxen, and his donkeys, and his sheep, and his tent, and all that he had, and they brought them up to the valley of Achor.
And Joshua said, Why have thou troubled us? Jehovah shall trouble thee this day. And all Israel stoned him with stones, and they burned them with fire, and stoned them with stones.
And they raised over him a great heap of stones, to this day, and Jehovah turned from the fierceness of his anger. Therefore the name of that place was called the valley of Achor to this day.

And Jehovah said to Joshua, Fear not, neither be thou dismayed. Take all the people of war with thee, and arise, go up to Ai. See, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his city, and his land.
And thou shall do to Ai and its king as thou did to Jericho and its king. Only the spoil of it, and the cattle of it, ye shall take for a prey to yourselves. Set thee an ambush for the city behind it.
So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up to Ai. And Joshua chose out thirty thousand men, the mighty men of valor, and sent them forth by night.
And he commanded them, saying, Behold, ye shall lie in ambush against the city, behind the city. Go not very far from the city, but be ye all ready,
and I, and all the people that are with me, will approach to the city. And it shall come to pass, when they come out against us, as at the first, that we will flee before them.
And they will come out after us, till we have drawn them away from the city, for they will say, They flee before us, as at the first. So we will flee before them.
And ye shall rise up from the ambush, and take possession of the city, for Jehovah your God will deliver it into your hand.
And it shall be, when ye have seized upon the city, that ye shall set the city on fire. According to the word of Jehovah shall ye do. See, I have commanded you.
And Joshua sent them forth, and they went to the ambushment, and abode between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai, but Joshua lodged that night among the people.
And Joshua arose up early in the morning, and mustered the people, and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai.
And all the people, even the men of war who were with him, went up, and drew near, and came before the city, and encamped on the north side of Ai. Now there was a valley between him and Ai.
And he took about five thousand men, and set them in ambush between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city.
So they set the people, even all the army that was on the north of the city, and their ambushment that were on the west of the city, and Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley.
And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it, that they hastened and rose up early, and the men of the city went out against Israel to battle, he and all his people, at the time appointed, before the Arabah, but he did not know that there was an ambush against him behind the city.
And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them, and fled by the way of the wilderness.
And all the people that were in the city were called together to pursue after them, and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the city.
And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel who did not go out after Israel. And they left the city open, and pursued after Israel.
And Jehovah said to Joshua, Stretch out the javelin that is in thy hand toward Ai, for I will give it into thy hand. And Joshua stretched out the javelin that was in his hand toward the city.
And the ambush arose quickly out of their place, and they ran as soon as he had stretched out his hand, and entered into the city, and took it. And they hastened and set the city on fire.
And when the men of Ai looked behind them, they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven, and they had no power to flee this way or that way. And the people who fled to the wilderness turned back upon the pursuers.
And when Joshua and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city ascended, then they turned again, and killed the men of Ai.
And the others came forth out of the city against them, so they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on that side. And they smote them so that they let none of them remain or escape.
And they took the king of Ai alive, and brought him to Joshua.
And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of killing all the inhabitants of Ai in the field, in the wilderness in which they pursued them, and they were all fallen by the edge of the sword until they were consumed, that all Israel returned to Ai, and smote it with the edge of the sword.
And all who fell that day, both of men and women, were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai.
For Joshua did not draw back his hand, with which he stretched out the javelin, until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai.
Only the cattle and the spoil of that city Israel took for prey to themselves, according to the word of Jehovah which he commanded Joshua.
So Joshua burnt Ai, and made it a heap forever, even a desolation, to this day.
And he hanged the king of Ai on a tree until the evening. And at the going down of the sun Joshua commanded, and they took his body down from the tree, and cast it at the entrance of the gate of the city, and raised a great heap of stones on it, to this day.
Then Joshua built an altar to Jehovah, the God of Israel, in mount Ebal,
as Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded the sons of Israel, as it is written in the book of the law of Moses, an altar of unhewn stones, upon which no man had lifted up any iron. And they offered burnt offerings on it to Jehovah, and sacrificed peace offerings.
And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses, which he wrote, in the presence of the sons of Israel.
And all Israel, and their elders and officers, and their judges, stood on this side of the ark and on that side before the priests the Levites, who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, as well the sojourner as the home born, half of them in front of mount Gerizim, and half of them in front of mount Ebal, as Moses the servant of Jehovah had commanded at the first, that they should bless the people of Israel.
And afterward he read all the words of the law, the blessing and the curse, according to all that is written in the book of the law.
There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua did not read before all the assembly of Israel, and the women, and the little ones, and the sojourners who were among them.

And it came to pass, when all the kings who were beyond the Jordan, in the hill-country, and in the lowland, and on all the shore of the great sea in front of Lebanon-the Hittite, and the Amorite, the Canaanite, the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite-heard of it,
that they gathered themselves together to fight with Joshua and with Israel with one accord.
But when the inhabitants of Gibeon heard what Joshua had done to Jericho and to Ai,
they also worked shrewdly, and went and made as if they had been ambassadors, and took old sacks upon their donkeys, and wine-skins, old and torn and bound up,
and old and patched shoes upon their feet, and old garments upon them, and all the bread of their provision was dry and became moldy.
And they went to Joshua to the camp at Gilgal, and said to him, and to the men of Israel, We have come from a far country, now therefore make ye a covenant with us.
And the men of Israel said to the Hivites, Perhaps ye dwell among us, and how shall we make a covenant with you?
And they said to Joshua, We are thy servants. And Joshua said to them, Who are ye, and from where do ye come?
And they said to him, From a very far country. Thy servants have come because of the name of Jehovah thy God, for we have heard the fame of him, and all that he did in Egypt,
and all that he did to the two kings of the Amorites who were beyond the Jordan, to Sihon king of Heshbon, and to Og king of Bashan, who was at Ashtaroth.
And our elders and all the inhabitants of our country spoke to us, saying, Take provision in your hand for the journey, and go to meet them, and say to them, We are your servants, and now make ye a covenant with us.
This our bread we took hot for our provision out of our houses on the day we came forth to go to you, but now, behold, it is dry, and has become moldy.
And these wine-skins, which we filled, were new, and, behold, they are torn. And these our garments and our shoes have become old by reason of the very long journey.
And the men took of their provision, and did not ask counsel at the mouth of Jehovah.
And Joshua made peace with them, and made a covenant with them to let them live, and the rulers of the congregation swore to them.
And it came to pass at the end of three days after they had made a covenant with them, that they heard that they were their neighbors, and that they dwelt among them.
And the sons of Israel journeyed, and came to their cities on the third day. Now their cities were Gibeon, and Chephirah, and Beeroth, and Kiriath-jearim.
And the sons of Israel did not smite them, because the rulers of the congregation had sworn to them by Jehovah, the God of Israel. And all the congregation murmured against the rulers.
But all the rulers said to all the congregation, We have sworn to them by Jehovah, the God of Israel, now therefore we may not touch them.
This we will do to them, and let them live, lest wrath be upon us because of the oath which we swore to them.
And the rulers said to them, Let them live. So they became hewers of wood and drawers of water to all the congregation, as the rulers had spoken to them.
And Joshua called for them, and he spoke to them, saying, Why have ye beguiled us, saying, We are very far from you, when ye dwell among us?
Now therefore ye are cursed, and there shall never fail to be bondmen of you, both hewers of wood and drawers of water for the house of my God.
And they answered Joshua, and said, Because it was certainly told thy servants, how that Jehovah thy God commanded his servant Moses to give you all the land, and to destroy all the inhabitants of the land from before you. Therefore we were very afraid for our lives because of you, and have done this thing.
And now, behold, we are in thy hand. As it seems good and right to thee to do to us, do.
And so he did to them, and delivered them out of the hand of the sons of Israel, that they did not kill them.
And Joshua made them that day hewers of wood and drawers of water for the congregation, and for the altar of Jehovah to this day in the place which he should choose.

Now it came to pass, when Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem heard how Joshua had taken Ai, and had utterly destroyed it, as he had done to Jericho and its king, so he had done to Ai and its king, and how the inhabitants of Gibeon had made peace with Israel, and were among them,
that they feared greatly, because Gibeon was a great city, as one of the royal cities, and because it was greater than Ai, and all the men of it were mighty.
Therefore Adoni-zedek king of Jerusalem sent to Hoham king of Hebron, and to Piram king of Jarmuth, and to Japhia king of Lachish, and to Debir king of Eglon, saying,
Come up to me, and help me, and let us smite Gibeon, for it has made peace with Joshua and with the sons of Israel.
Therefore the five kings of the Amorites, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon, gathered themselves together, and went up, they and all their armies, and encamped against Gibeon, and made war against it.
And the men of Gibeon sent to Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying, Slack not thy hand from thy servants. Come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us, for all the kings of the Amorites who dwell in the hill-country are gathered together against us.
So Joshua went up from Gilgal, he, and all the people of war with him, and all the mighty men of valor.
And Jehovah said to Joshua, Fear them not, for I have delivered them into thy hands. There shall not a man of them stand before thee.
Joshua therefore came upon them suddenly, for he went up from Gilgal all the night.
And Jehovah discomfited them before Israel, and he killed them with a great slaughter at Gibeon, and chased them by the way of the ascent of Beth-horon, and smote them to Azekah, and to Makkedah.
And it came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, while they were at the descent of Beth-horon, that Jehovah cast down great stones from heaven upon them to Azekah, and they died. More died with the hailstones than those whom the sons of Israel killed with the sword.
Then Joshua spoke to Jehovah in the day when Jehovah delivered up the Amorites before the sons of Israel. And he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon, and thou, Moon, in the valley of Aijalon.
And the sun stood still, and the moon stayed, until the nation had avenged themselves of their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jashar? And the sun stayed in the midst of heaven, and hastened not to go down about a whole day.
And there was no day like that before it or after it, that Jehovah hearkened to the voice of a man, for Jehovah fought for Israel.
And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to the camp at Gilgal.
And these five kings fled, and hid themselves in the cave at Makkedah.
And it was told Joshua, saying, The five kings are found hidden in the cave at Makkedah.
And Joshua said, Roll great stones to the mouth of the cave, and set men by it to keep them,
but stay ye not. Pursue after your enemies, and smite the hindmost of them. Do not allow them to enter into their cities, for Jehovah your God has delivered them into your hand.
And it came to pass, when Joshua and the sons of Israel had made an end of killing them with a very great slaughter, till they were consumed, and the remnant which remained of them had entered into the fortified cities,
that all the people returned to the camp to Joshua at Makkedah in peace. No man moved his tongue against any of the sons of Israel.
Then Joshua said, Open the mouth of the cave, and bring forth those five kings to me out of the cave.
And they did so, and brought forth those five kings to him out of the cave, the king of Jerusalem, the king of Hebron, the king of Jarmuth, the king of Lachish, the king of Eglon.
And it came to pass, when they brought forth those kings to Joshua, that Joshua called for all the men of Israel, and said to the chiefs of the men of war who went with him, Come near, put your feet upon the necks of these kings. And they came near, and put their feet upon the necks of them.
And Joshua said to them, Fear not, nor be dismayed. Be strong and of good courage, for thus shall Jehovah do to all your enemies against whom ye fight.
And afterward Joshua smote them, and put them to death, and hanged them on five trees. And they were hanging upon the trees until the evening.
And it came to pass at the time of the going down of the sun, that Joshua commanded, and they took them down off the trees, and cast them into the cave in which they had hidden themselves, and laid great stones on the mouth of the cave, to this very day.
And Joshua took Makkedah on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king of it. He utterly destroyed them and all the souls that were in it. He left none remaining, and he did to the king of Makkedah as he had done to the king of Jericho.
And Joshua passed from Makkedah, and all Israel with him, to Libnah, and fought against Libnah.
And Jehovah delivered it also, and the king of it, into the hand of Israel. And he smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were in it. He left none remaining in it, and he did to the king of it as he had done to the king of Jericho.
And Joshua passed from Libnah, and all Israel with him, to Lachish, and encamped against it, and fought against it.
And Jehovah delivered Lachish into the hand of Israel. And he took it on the second day, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and all the souls that were in it, according to all that he had done to Libnah.
Then Horam king of Gezer came up to help Lachish. And Joshua smote him and his people until he had left him none remaining.
And Joshua passed from Lachish, and all Israel with him, to Eglon. And they encamped against it, and fought against it.
And they took it on that day, and smote it with the edge of the sword. And all the souls that were in it he utterly destroyed that day, according to all that he had done to Lachish.
And Joshua went up from Eglon, and all Israel with him, to Hebron. And they fought against it,
and they took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and the king of it, and all the cities of it, and all the souls that were in it. He left none remaining, according to all that he had done to Eglon, but he utterly destroyed it, and all the souls that were in it.
And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to Debir, and fought against it.
And he took it, and the king of it, and all the cities of it. And they smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed all the souls that were in it. He left none remaining. As he had done to Hebron, so he did to Debir, and to the king of it, as he had done also to Libnah, and to the king of it.
So Joshua smote all the land, the hill-country, and the South, and the lowland, and the slopes, and all their kings. He left none remaining, but he utterly destroyed all that breathed, as Jehovah, the God of Israel, commanded.
And Joshua smote them from Kadesh-barnea even to Gaza, and all the country of Goshen, even to Gibeon.
And all these kings and their land Joshua took at one time, because Jehovah, the God of Israel, fought for Israel.
And Joshua returned, and all Israel with him, to the camp to Gilgal.

And it came to pass, when Jabin king of Hazor heard of it, that he sent to Jobab king of Madon, and to the king of Shimron, and to the king of Achshaph,
and to the kings who were on the north, in the hill-country, and in the Arabah south of Chinneroth, and in the lowland, and in the heights of Dor on the west,
to the Canaanite on the east and on the west, and the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite in the hill-country, and the Hivite under Hermon in the land of Mizpah,
and they went out, they and all their armies with them, much people, even as the sand that is upon the sea-shore in multitude, with horses and chariots, very many.
And all these kings met together. And they came and encamped together at the waters of Merom, to fight with Israel.
And Jehovah said to Joshua, Be not afraid because of them, for tomorrow at this time I will deliver them up all slain before Israel. Thou shall hock their horses, and burn their chariots with fire.
So Joshua came, and all the people of war with him, against them by the waters of Merom suddenly, and fell upon them.
And Jehovah delivered them into the hand of Israel, and they smote them, and chased them to great Sidon, and to Misrephoth-maim, and to the valley of Mizpeh eastward. And they smote them until they left them none remaining.
And Joshua did to them as Jehovah bade him. He hocked their horses, and burnt their chariots with fire.
And Joshua turned back at that time, and took Hazor, and smote the king of it with the sword, for Hazor was formerly the head of all those kingdoms.
And they smote all the souls who were in it with the edge of the sword, utterly destroying them. There was none left that breathed, and he burnt Hazor with fire.
And all the cities of those kings, and all the kings of them, Joshua took, and he smote them with the edge of the sword, and utterly destroyed them, as Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded.
But as for the cities that stood on their mounds, Israel burned none of them, except only Hazor. Joshua burned that.
And all the spoil of these cities, and the cattle, the sons of Israel took for a prey to themselves, but every man they smote with the edge of the sword until they had destroyed them, neither did they leave any who breathed.
As Jehovah commanded Moses his servant, so Moses commanded Joshua, and so Joshua did. He left nothing undone of all that Jehovah commanded Moses.
So Joshua took all that land, the hill-country, and all the South, and all the land of Goshen, and the lowland, and the Arabah, and the hill-country of Israel, and the lowland of the same,
from mount Halak, that goes up to Seir, even to Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon under mount Hermon. And he took all their kings, and smote them, and put them to death.
Joshua made war a long time with all those kings.
There was not a city that made peace with the sons of Israel, except the Hivites the inhabitants of Gibeon. They took all in battle.
For it was of Jehovah to harden their hearts, to come against Israel in battle, that he might utterly destroy them, that they might have no favor, but that he might destroy them as Jehovah commanded Moses.
And Joshua came at that time, and cut off the Anakim from the hill-country, from Hebron, from Debir, from Anab, and from all the hill-country of Judah, and from all the hill-country of Israel. Joshua utterly destroyed them with their cities.
There was none of the Anakim left in the land of the sons of Israel. Only in Gaza, in Gath, and in Ashdod some remained.
So Joshua took the whole land, according to all that Jehovah spoke to Moses. And Joshua gave it for an inheritance to Israel according to their divisions by their tribes. And the land had rest from war.

Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt in Heshbon, and ruled from Aroer, which is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, and the middle of the valley, and half Gilead, even to the river Jabbok, the border of the sons of Ammon,
and the Arabah to the sea of Chinneroth, eastward, and to the sea of the Arabah, even the Salt Sea, eastward, the way to Beth-jeshimoth, and on the south, under the slopes of Pisgah,
and the border of Og king of Bashan, of the remnant of the Rephaim, who dwelt at Ashtaroth and at Edrei,
and ruled in mount Hermon, and in Salecah, and in all Bashan, to the border of the Geshurites and the Maacathites, and half Gilead, the border of Sihon king of Heshbon.
Moses the servant of Jehovah and the sons of Israel smote them. And Moses the servant of Jehovah gave it for a possession to the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
And these are the kings of the land whom Joshua and the sons of Israel smote beyond the Jordan westward, from Baal-gad in the valley of Lebanon even to mount Halak, that goes up to Seir, and Joshua gave it to the tribes of Israel for a possession according to their divisions,
The king of Jericho, one; the king of Ai, which is beside Bethel, one;
the king of Jerusalem, one; the king of Hebron, one;
the king of Jarmuth, one; the king of Lachish, one;
the king of Eglon, one; the king of Gezer, one;
the king of Debir, one; the king of Geder, one;
the king of Hormah, one; the king of Arad, one;
the king of Libnah, one; the king of Adullam, one;
the king of Makkedah, one; the king of Bethel, one;
the king of Tappuah, one; the king of Hepher, one;
the king of Aphek, one; the king of Lassharon, one;
the king of Madon, one; the king of Hazor, one;
the king of Shimron-meron, one; the king of Achshaph, one;
the king of Taanach, one; the king of Megiddo, one;
the king of Kedesh, one; the king of Jokneam in Carmel, one;
the king of Dor in the height of Dor, one; the king of Goiim in Gilgal, one;
all the kings thirty-one.

Now Joshua was old and well stricken in years, and Jehovah said to him, Thou are old and well stricken in years, and there remains yet very much land to be possessed.
all the regions of the Philistines, and all the Geshurites;
from the Shihor, which is before Egypt, even to the border of Ekron northward, which is reckoned to the Canaanites; the five lords of the Philistines; the Gazites, and the Ashdodites, the Ashkelonites, the Gittites, and the Ekronites; also the Avvim
on the south; all the land of the Canaanites, and Mearah that belongs to the Sidonians, to Aphek, to the border of the Amorites;
and the land of the Gebalites, and all Lebanon, toward the sunrise, from Baal-gad under mount Hermon to the entrance of Hamath;
all the inhabitants of the hill-country from Lebanon to Misrephoth-maim, even all the Sidonians. I will drive them out from before the sons of Israel, only allot thou it to Israel for an inheritance as I have commanded thee.
Now therefore divide this land for an inheritance to the nine tribes, and the half-tribe of Manasseh.
from Aroer, that is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, and the city that is in the middle of the valley, and all the plain of Medeba to Dibon;
and all the cities of Sihon king of the Amorites, who reigned in Heshbon, to the border of the sons of Ammon;
and Gilead, and the border of the Geshurites and Maacathites, and all mount Hermon, and all Bashan to Salecah;
all the kingdom of Og in Bashan, who reigned in Ashtaroth and in Edrei (the same was left of the remnant of the Rephaim), for these Moses smote, and drove them out.
Nevertheless the sons of Israel did not drive out the Geshurites, nor the Maacathites, but Geshur and Maacath dwell in the midst of Israel to this day.
Only to the tribe of Levi he gave no inheritance. The offerings of Jehovah, the God of Israel, made by fire are his inheritance as he spoke to him.
And Moses gave to the tribe of the sons of Reuben according to their families.
And their border was from Aroer, that is on the edge of the valley of the Arnon, and the city that is in the middle of the valley, and all the plain by Medeba;
Heshbon, and all its cities that are in the plain; Dibon, and Bamoth-baal, and Beth-baal-meon,
and Jahaz, and Kedemoth, and Mephaath,
and Kiriathaim, and Sibmah, and Zereth-shahar in the mount of the valley,
and Beth-peor, and the slopes of Pisgah, and Beth-jeshimoth,
and all the cities of the plain, and all the kingdom of Sihon king of the Amorites who reigned in Heshbon, whom Moses smote with the chiefs of Midian, Evi, and Rekem, and Zur, and Hur, and Reba, the rulers of Sihon who dwelt in the land.
The sons of Israel also killed Balaam the son of Beor, the diviner, with the sword among the rest of their slain.
And the border of the sons of Reuben was the Jordan, and the border of it. This was the inheritance of the sons of Reuben according to their families, the cities and the villages of it.
And Moses gave to the tribe of Gad, to the sons of Gad, according to their families.
And their border was Jazer, and all the cities of Gilead, and half the land of the sons of Ammon, to Aroer that is before Rabbah,
and from Heshbon to Ramath-mizpeh, and Betonim, and from Mahanaim to the border of Debir,
and in the valley, Beth-haram, and Beth-nimrah, and Succoth, and Zaphon, the rest of the kingdom of Sihon king of Heshbon, the Jordan and the border of it, to the outermost part of the sea of Chinnereth beyond the Jordan eastward.
This is the inheritance of the sons of Gad according to their families, the cities and the villages of it.
And Moses gave to the half-tribe of Manasseh, and it was for the half-tribe of the sons of Manasseh according to their families.
And their border was from Mahanaim, all Bashan, all the kingdom of Og king of Bashan, and all the towns of Jair, which are in Bashan, sixty cities.
And half Gilead, and Ashtaroth, and Edrei, the cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan, were for the sons of Machir the son of Manasseh, even for the half of the sons of Machir according to their families.
These are the inheritances which Moses distributed in the plains of Moab, beyond the Jordan at Jericho, eastward.
But to the tribe of Levi Moses gave no inheritance. Jehovah, the God of Israel, is their inheritance, as he spoke to them.

And these are the inheritances which the sons of Israel took in the land of Canaan, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel, distributed to them,
by the lot of their inheritance, as Jehovah commanded by Moses, for the nine tribes, and for the half-tribe.
For Moses had given the inheritance of the two tribes and the half-tribe beyond the Jordan, but to the Levites he gave no inheritance among them.
For the sons of Joseph were two tribes, Manasseh and Ephraim. And they gave no portion to the Levites in the land except cities to dwell in with the suburbs of it for their cattle and for their substance.
As Jehovah commanded Moses, so the sons of Israel did, and they divided the land.
Then the sons of Judah drew near to Joshua in Gilgal. And Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite said to him, Thou know the thing that Jehovah spoke to Moses the man of God concerning me and concerning thee in Kadesh-barnea.
I was forty years old when Moses the servant of Jehovah sent me from Kadesh-barnea to spy out the land, and I brought him word again as it was in my heart.
Nevertheless my brothers who went up with me made the heart of the people melt, but I wholly followed Jehovah my God.
And Moses swore on that day, saying, Surely the land in which thy foot has trodden shall be an inheritance to thee and to thy sons forever because thou have wholly followed Jehovah my God.
And now, behold, Jehovah has kept me alive, as he spoke, these forty-five years, from the time that Jehovah spoke this word to Moses, while Israel walked in the wilderness. And now, lo, I am this day eighty-five years old.
As yet I am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me. As my strength was then, even so is my strength now, for war, and to go out and to come in.
Now therefore give me this hill-country of which Jehovah spoke in that day. For thou heard in that day how the Anakim were there, and cities great and fortified. It may be that Jehovah will be with me, and I shall drive them out, as Jehovah spoke.
And Joshua blessed him, and he gave Hebron to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for an inheritance.
Therefore Hebron became the inheritance of Caleb the son of Jephunneh the Kenizzite to this day because he wholly followed Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Now the name of Hebron was formerly Kiriath-arba. Arba was the greatest man among the Anakim. And the land had rest from war.

And the lot for the tribe of the sons of Judah according to their families was to the border of Edom, even to the wilderness of Zin southward, at the outermost part of the south.
And their south border was from the outermost part of the Salt Sea, from the bay that looks southward.
And it went out southward of the ascent of Akrabbim, and passed along to Zin, and went up by the south of Kadesh-barnea, and passed along by Hezron, and went up to Addar, and turned about to Karka,
and it passed along to Azmon, and went out at the brook of Egypt. And the goings out of the border were at the sea. This shall be your south border.
And the east border was the Salt Sea, even to the end of the Jordan. And the border of the north quarter was from the bay of the sea at the end of the Jordan,
and the border went up to Beth-hoglah, and passed along by the north of Beth-arabah, and the border went up to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,
and the border went up to Debir from the valley of Achor, and so northward, looking toward Gilgal, that is opposite the ascent of Adummim, which is on the south side of the river, and the border passed along to the waters of En-shemesh. And the goings out of it were at En-rogel,
and the border went up by the valley of the son of Hinnom to the side of the Jebusite southward (the same is Jerusalem), and the border went up to the top of the mountain that lies before the valley of Hinnom westward, which is at the outermost part of the vale of Rephaim northward,
and the border extended from the top of the mountain to the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah, and went out to the cities of mount Ephron, and the border extended to Baalah (the same is Kiriath-jearim),
and the border turned about from Baalah westward to mount Seir, and passed along to the side of mount Jearim on the north (the same is Chesalon), and went down to Beth-shemesh, and passed along by Timnah,
and the border went out to the side of Ekron northward, and the border extended to Shikkeron, and passed along to mount Baalah, and went out at Jabneel. And the goings out of the border were at the sea.
And the west border was to the great sea, and the border of it. This is the border of the sons of Judah round about according to their families.
And to Caleb the son of Jephunneh he gave a portion among the sons of Judah, according to the commandment of Jehovah to Joshua, even Kiriath-arba. Arba was the father of Anak (the same is Hebron).
Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai, the sons of Anak.
And he went up from there against the inhabitants of Debir. Now the name of Debir formerly was Kiriath-sepher.
And Caleb said, He who smites Kiriath-sepher, and takes it, to him I will give Achsah my daughter to wife.
And Othniel the son of Kenaz, the brother of Caleb, took it, and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
And it came to pass, when she came, that she moved him to ask of her father a field. And she alighted from off her donkey, and Caleb said, What would thou?
And she said, Give me a blessing, because thou have set me in the land of the South, give me also springs of water. And he gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Judah according to their families.
Kabzeel, and Eder, and Jagur,
and Kinah, and Dimonah, and Adadah,
and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Ithnan,
Ziph, and Telem, and Bealoth,
and Hazor-hadattah, and Kerioth-hezron (the same is Hazor),
Amam, and Shema, and Moladah,
and Hazar-gaddah, and Heshmon, and Beth-pelet,
and Hazar-shual, and Beersheba, and Biziothiah,
Baalah, and Iim, and Ezem,
and Eltolad, and Chesil, and Hormah,
and Ziklag, and Madmannah, and Sansannah,
and Lebaoth, and Shilhim, and Ain, and Rimmon. All the cities are twenty-nine, with their villages.
In the lowland, Eshtaol, and Zorah, and Ashnah,
and Zanoah, and En-gannim, Tappuah, and Enam,
Jarmuth, and Adullam, Socoh, and Azekah,
and Shaaraim, and Adithaim, and Gederah, and Gederothaim; fourteen cities with their villages.
Zenan, and Hadashah, and Migdal-gad,
and Dilean, and Mizpeh, and Joktheel,
Lachish, and Bozkath, and Eglon,
and Cabbon, and Lahmam, and Chitlish,
and Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and Naamah, and Makkedah; sixteen cities with their villages.
Libnah, and Ether, and Ashan,
and Iphtah, and Ashnah, and Nezib,
and Keilah, and Achzib, and Mareshah; nine cities with their villages.
Ekron, with its towns and its villages,
from Ekron even to the sea, all that were by the side of Ashdod, with their villages.
Ashdod, its towns and its villages, Gaza, its towns and its villages, to the brook of Egypt, and the great sea, and the border of it.
And in the hill-country, Shamir, and Jattir, and Socoh,
and Dannah, and Kiriath-sannah (the same is Debir),
and Anab, and Eshtemoh, and Anim,
and Goshen, and Holon, and Giloh; eleven cities with their villages.
Arab, and Dumah, and Eshan,
and Janim, and Beth-tappuah, and Aphekah,
and Humtah, and Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron), and Zior; nine cities with their villages.
Maon, Carmel, and Ziph, and Jutah,
and Jezreel, and Jokdeam, and Zanoah,
Kain, Gibeah, and Timnah; ten cities with their villages.
Halhul, Beth-zur, and Gedor,
and Maarath, and Beth-anoth, and Eltekon; six cities with their villages.
Kiriath-baal (the same is Kiriath-jearim), and Rabbah; two cities with their villages.
In the wilderness, Beth-arabah, Middin, and Secacah,
and Nibshan, and the City of Salt, and En-gedi; six cities with their villages.
And as for the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the sons of Judah could not drive them out, but the Jebusites dwell with the sons of Judah at Jerusalem to this day.

And the lot came out for the sons of Joseph from the Jordan at Jericho, at the waters of Jericho on the east, even the wilderness, going up from Jericho through the hill-country to Bethel.
And it went out from Bethel to Luz, and passed along to the border of the Archites to Ataroth,
and it went down westward to the border of the Japhletites, to the border of Beth-horon the nether, even to Gezer. And the goings out of it were at the sea.
And the sons of Joseph, Manasseh and Ephraim, took their inheritance.
the border of their inheritance eastward was Ataroth-addar, to Beth-horon the upper,
and the border went out westward at Michmethath on the north, and the border turned about eastward to Taanath-shiloh, and passed along it on the east of Janoah,
and it went down from Janoah to Ataroth, and to Naarah, and reached to Jericho, and went out at the Jordan.
From Tappuah the border went along westward to the brook of Kanah. And the goings out of it were at the sea. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Ephraim according to their families,
together with the cities which were set apart for the sons of Ephraim in the midst of the inheritance of the sons of Manasseh, all the cities with their villages.
And they did not drive out the Canaanites who dwelt in Gezer, but the Canaanites dwell in the midst of Ephraim to this day, and have become servants to do task work.

And this was the lot for the tribe of Manasseh, for he was the firstborn of Joseph. As for Machir the firstborn of Manasseh, the father of Gilead, because he was a man of war, therefore he had Gilead and Bashan.
for the sons of Abiezer, and for the sons of Helek, and for the sons of Asriel, and for the sons of Shechem, and for the sons of Hepher, and for the sons of Shemida. These were the male children of Manasseh the son of Joseph according to their families.
Mahlah, and Noah, Hoglah, Milcah, and Tirzah.
And they came near before Eleazar the priest, and before Joshua the son of Nun, and before the rulers, saying, Jehovah commanded Moses to give us an inheritance among our brothers. Therefore according to the commandment of Jehovah he gave them an inheritance among the brothers of their father.
And there fell ten parts to Manasseh, besides the land of Gilead and Bashan, which is beyond the Jordan,
because the daughters of Manasseh had an inheritance among his sons. And the land of Gilead belonged to the rest of the sons of Manasseh.
And the border of Manasseh was from Asher to Michmethath, which is before Shechem. And the border went along to the right hand, to the inhabitants of En-tappuah.
The land of Tappuah belonged to Manasseh, but Tappuah on the border of Manasseh belonged to the sons of Ephraim.
And the border went down to the brook of Kanah, southward of the brook. These cities belonged to Ephraim among the cities of Manasseh. And the border of Manasseh was on the north side of the brook. And the goings out of it were at the sea.
Southward it was Ephraim's, and northward it was Manasseh's, and the sea was his border, and they reached to Asher on the north, and to Issachar on the east.
And Manasseh had in Issachar and in Asher, Beth-shean and its towns, and Ibleam and its towns, and the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, and the inhabitants of Endor and its towns, and the inhabitants of Taanach and its towns, and the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns, even the three heights.
Yet the sons of Manasseh could not drive out those cities, but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.
And it came to pass, when the sons of Israel grew strong, that they put the Canaanites to task work, and did not utterly drive them out.
And the sons of Joseph spoke to Joshua, saying, Why have thou given me but one lot and one part for an inheritance, seeing I am a great people, inasmuch as until now Jehovah has blessed me?
And Joshua said to them, If thou be a great people, get thee up to the forest, and cut down for thyself there in the land of the Perizzites and of the Rephaim, since the hill-country of Ephraim is too narrow for thee.
And the sons of Joseph said, The hill-country is not enough for us, and all the Canaanites who dwell in the land of the valley have chariots of iron, both those who are in Beth-shean and its towns, and those who are in the valley of Jezreel.
And Joshua spoke to the house of Joseph, even to Ephraim and to Manasseh, saying, Thou are a great people, and have great power. Thou shall not have only one lot,
but the hill-country shall be thine, for though it is a forest, thou shall cut it down, and the goings out of it shall be thine. For thou shall drive out the Canaanites, though they have chariots of iron, and though they are strong.

And the whole congregation of the sons of Israel assembled themselves together at Shiloh, and set up the tent of meeting there, and the land was subdued before them.
And seven tribes remained among the sons of Israel, which had not yet divided their inheritance.
And Joshua said to the sons of Israel, How long are ye slack to go in to possess the land, which Jehovah, the God of your fathers, has given you?
Appoint for you three men of each tribe. And I will send them, and they shall arise, and walk through the land, and describe it according to their inheritance, and they shall come to me.
Judah shall abide in his border on the south, and the house of Joseph shall abide in their border on the north.
And ye shall describe the land into seven portions, and bring it here to me. And I will cast lots for you here before Jehovah our God.
For the Levites have no portion among you, for the priesthood of Jehovah is their inheritance, and Gad and Reuben and the half-tribe of Manasseh have received their inheritance beyond the Jordan eastward, which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave them.
And the men arose, and went. And Joshua charged those who went to describe the land, saying, Go and walk through the land, and describe it, and come again to me. And I will cast lots for you here before Jehovah in Shiloh.
And the men went and passed through the land, and described it by cities into seven portions in a book. And they came to Joshua to the camp at Shiloh.
And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before Jehovah. And there Joshua divided the land to the sons of Israel according to their divisions.
And the lot of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin came up according to their families, and the border of their lot went out between the sons of Judah and the sons of Joseph.
And their border on the north quarter was from the Jordan, and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north, and went up through the hill-country westward. And the goings out of it were at the wilderness of Beth-aven.
And the border passed along from there to Luz, to the side of Luz (the same is Bethel), southward, and the border went down to Ataroth-addar, by the mountain that lies on the south of Beth-horon the nether.
And the border extended, and turned around on the west quarter southward, from the mountain that lies before Beth-horon southward. And the goings out of it were at Kiriath-baal (the same is Kiriath-jearim), a city of the sons of Judah. This was the west quarter.
And the south quarter was from the uttermost part of Kiriath-jearim, and the border went out westward, and went out to the fountain of the waters of Nephtoah,
and the border went down to the uttermost part of the mountain that lies before the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is in the vale of Rephaim northward, and it went down to the valley of Hinnom, to the side of the Jebusite southward, and went down to En-rogel,
and it extended northward, and went out at En-shemesh, and went out to Geliloth, which is opposite the ascent of Adummim, and it went down to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben,
and it passed along to the side opposite the Arabah northward, and went down to the Arabah,
and the border passed along to the side of Beth-hoglah northward. And the goings out of the border were at the north bay of the Salt Sea, at the south end of the Jordan. This was the south border.
And the Jordan was the border of it on the east quarter. This was the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin, by the borders of it round about, according to their families.
Jericho, and Beth-hoglah, and Emek-keziz,
and Beth-arabah, and Zemaraim, and Bethel,
and Avvim, and Parah, and Ophrah,
and Chephar-ammoni, and Ophni, and Geba; twelve cities with their villages.
Gibeon, and Ramah, and Beeroth,
and Mizpeh, and Chephirah, and Mozah,
and Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah,
and Zelah, Eleph, and the Jebusite (the same is Jerusalem), Gibeath, and Kiriath; fourteen cities with their villages. This is the inheritance of the sons of Benjamin according to their families.

And the second lot came out for Simeon, even for the tribe of the sons of Simeon according to their families. And their inheritance was in the midst of the inheritance of the sons of Judah.
And they had for their inheritance Beersheba, or Sheba, and Moladah,
and Hazar-shual, and Balah, and Ezem,
and Eltolad, and Bethul, and Hormah,
and Ziklag, and Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susah,
and Beth-lebaoth, and Sharuhen; thirteen cities with their villages.
Ain, Rimmon, and Ether, and Ashan; four cities with their villages;
and all the villages that were round about these cities to Baalath-beer, Ramah of the South. This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Simeon according to their families.
The inheritance of the sons of Simeon was out of the part of the sons of Judah, for the portion of the sons of Judah was too much for them. Therefore the sons of Simeon had inheritance in the midst of their inheritance.
And the third lot came up for the sons of Zebulun according to their families. And the border of their inheritance was to Sarid,
and their border went up westward, even to Maralah, and reached to Dabbesheth, and it reached to the brook that is before Jokneam,
and it turned from Sarid eastward toward the sunrising to the border of Chisloth-tabor, and it went out to Daberath, and went up to Japhia.
And from there it passed along eastward to Gath-hepher, to Eth-kazin, and it went out at Rimmon which stretches to Neah,
and the border turned about it on the north to Hannathon. And the goings out of it were at the valley of Iph-tah-el,
and Kattath, and Nahalal, and Shimron, and Idalah, and Bethlehem; twelve cities with their villages.
This is the inheritance of the sons of Zebulun according to their families, these cities with their villages.
The fourth lot came out for Issachar, even for the sons of Issachar according to their families.
And their border was to Jezreel, and Chesulloth, and Shunem,
and Hapharaim, and Shion, and Anaharath,
and Rabbith, and Kishion, and Ebez,
and Remeth, and Engannim, and En-haddah, and Beth-pazzez,
and the border reached to Tabor, and Shahazumah, and Beth-shemesh. And the goings out of their border were at the Jordan; sixteen cities with their villages.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Issachar according to their families, the cities with their villages.
And the fifth lot came out for the tribe of the sons of Asher according to their families.
And their border was Helkath, and Hali, and Beten, and Achshaph,
and Allammelech, and Amad, and Mishal, and it reached to Carmel westward, and to Shihor-libnath,
and it turned toward the sunrising to Beth-dagon, and reached to Zebulun, and to the valley of Iph-tah-el northward to Beth-emek and Neiel, and it went out to Cabul on the left hand,
and Ebron, and Rehob, and Hammon, and Kanah, even to great Sidon,
and the border turned to Ramah, and to the fortified city of Tyre, and the border turned to Hosah. And the goings out of it were at the sea by the region of Achzib,
also Ummah, and Aphek, and Rehob; twenty-two cities with their villages.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Asher according to their families, these cities with their villages.
The sixth lot came out for the sons of Naphtali, even for the sons of Naphtali according to their families.
And their border was from Heleph, from the oak in Zaanannim, and Adam-inekeb, and Jabneel, to Lakkum. And the goings out of it were at the Jordan.
And the border turned westward to Aznoth-tabor, and went out from there to Hukkok, and it reached to Zebulun on the south, and reached to Asher on the west, and to Judah at the Jordan toward the sunrising.
And the fortified cities were Ziddim, Zer, and Hammath, Rakkath, and Chinnereth,
and Adamah, and Ramah, and Hazor,
and Kedesh, and Edrei, and En-hazor,
and Iron, and Migdal-el, Horem, and Beth-anath, and Beth-shemesh; nineteen cities with their villages.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Naphtali according to their families, the cities with their villages.
The seventh lot came out for the tribe of the sons of Dan according to their families.
And the border of their inheritance was Zorah, and Eshtaol, and Ir-shemesh,
and Shaalabbin, and Aijalon, and Ithlah,
and Elon, and Timnah, and Ekron,
and Eltekeh, and Gibbethon, and Baalath,
and Jehud, and Bene-berak, and Gath-rimmon,
and Me-jarkon, and Rakkon, with the border opposite Joppa.
And the border of the sons of Dan went out beyond them, for the sons of Dan went up and fought against Leshem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and possessed it, and dwelt in it, and called Leshem, Dan, after the name of Dan their father.
This is the inheritance of the tribe of the sons of Dan according to their families, these cities with their villages.
So they made an end of distributing the land for inheritance by the borders of it. And the sons of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun in the midst of them.
According to the commandment of Jehovah they gave him the city which he asked, even Timnath-serah in the hill-country of Ephraim. And he built the city, and dwelt in it.
These are the inheritances, which Eleazar the priest, and Joshua the son of Nun, and the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel, distributed for inheritance by lot in Shiloh before Jehovah, at the door of the tent of meeting. So they made an end of dividing the land.

And Jehovah spoke to Joshua, saying,
Speak to the sons of Israel, saying, Assign for you the cities of refuge, of which I spoke to you by Moses,
that the manslayer who kills any soul unwittingly and unawares may flee there. And they shall be to you for a refuge from the avenger of blood.
And he shall flee to one of those cities, and shall stand at the entrance of the gate of the city, and declare his case in the ears of the elders of that city. And they shall take him into the city to them, and give him a place, that he may dwell among them.
And if the avenger of blood pursues after him, then they shall not deliver up the manslayer into his hand, because he smote his neighbor unawares, and did not hate him formerly.
And he shall dwell in that city, until he stands before the congregation for judgment, until the death of the high priest who shall be in those days. Then the manslayer shall return, and come to his own city, and to his own house, to the city from where he fled.
And they set apart Kedesh in Galilee in the hill-country of Naphtali, and Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim, and Kiriath-arba (the same is Hebron) in the hill-country of Judah.
And beyond the Jordan at Jericho eastward, they assigned Bezer in the wilderness in the plain out of the tribe of Reuben, and Ramoth in Gilead out of the tribe of Gad, and Golan in Bashan out of the tribe of Manasseh.
These were the appointed cities for all the sons of Israel, and for the stranger who sojourns among them, that whoever kills any soul unwittingly might flee there, and not die by the hand of the avenger of blood until he stood before the congregation.

Then the heads of fathers of the Levites came near to Eleazar the priest, and to Joshua the son of Nun, and to the heads of fathers of the tribes of the sons of Israel.
And they spoke to them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan, saying, Jehovah commanded Moses to give us cities to dwell in, with the suburbs of it for our cattle.
And the lot came out for the families of the Kohathites. And the sons of Aaron the priest, who were of the Levites, had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of the Simeonites, and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities.
And the rest of the sons of Kohath had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the tribe of Dan, and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, ten cities.
And the sons of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.
The sons of Merari according to their families had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.
And the sons of Israel gave these cities by lot to the Levites with their suburbs, as Jehovah commanded by Moses.
And they gave out of the tribe of the sons of Judah, and out of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, these cities which are here mentioned by name,
and they were for the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites, who were of the sons of Levi, for theirs was the first lot.
And they gave them Kiriath-arba, Arba was the father of Anak (the same is Hebron), in the hill-country of Judah, with the suburbs of it round about it.
But the fields of the city, and the villages of it, gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh for his possession.
And to the sons of Aaron the priest they gave Hebron with its suburbs, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Libnah with its suburbs,
and Jattir with its suburbs, and Eshtemoa with its suburbs,
and Holon with its suburbs, and Debir with its suburbs,
and Ain with its suburbs, and Juttah with its suburbs, and Beth-shemesh with its suburbs; nine cities out of those two tribes.
And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with its suburbs, Geba with its suburbs,
Anathoth with its suburbs, and Almon with its suburbs; four cities.
All the cities of the sons of Aaron, the priests, were thirteen cities with their suburbs.
And the families of the sons of Kohath, the Levites, even the rest of the sons of Kohath, they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim.
And they gave them Shechem with its suburbs in the hill-country of Ephraim, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Gezer with its suburbs,
and Kibzaim with its suburbs, and Beth-horon with its suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Dan, Elteke with its suburbs, Gibbethon with its suburbs,
Aijalon with its suburbs, Gath-rimmon with its suburbs; four cities.
And out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Taanach with its suburbs, and Gath-rimmon with its suburbs; two cities.
All the cities of the families of the rest of the sons of Kohath were ten with their suburbs.
And to the sons of Gershon, of the families of the Levites, out of the half-tribe of Manasseh they gave Golan in Bashan with its suburbs, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Be-eshterah with its suburbs; two cities.
And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishion with its suburbs, Daberath with its suburbs,
Jarmuth with its suburbs, En-gannim with its suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with its suburbs, Abdon with its suburbs,
Helkath with its suburbs, and Rehob with its suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with its suburbs, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Hammoth-dor with its suburbs, and Kartan with its suburbs; three cities.
All the cities of the Gershonites according to their families were thirteen cities with their suburbs.
And to the families of the sons of Merari, the rest of the Levites, out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with its suburbs, and Kartah with its suburbs,
Dimnah with its suburbs, Nahalal with its suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with its suburbs, and Jahaz with its suburbs,
Kedemoth with its suburbs, and Mephaath with its suburbs; four cities.
And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with its suburbs, the city of refuge for the manslayer, and Mahanaim with its suburbs,
Heshbon with its suburbs, Jazer with its suburbs; four cities in all.
All these were the cities of the sons of Merari according to their families, even the rest of the families of the Levites; and their lot was twelve cities.
All the cities of the Levites in the midst of the possession of the sons of Israel were forty-eight cities with their suburbs.
These cities were every one with their suburbs round about them. Thus it was with all these cities.
So Jehovah gave to Israel all the land which he swore to give to their fathers, and they possessed it, and dwelt in it.
And Jehovah gave them rest round about, according to all that he swore to their fathers. And there stood not a man of all their enemies before them. Jehovah delivered all their enemies into their hand.
There failed not anything of any good thing which Jehovah had spoken to the house of Israel; all came to pass.

Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh,
and said to them, Ye have kept all that Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, and have hearkened to my voice in all that I commanded you.
Ye have not left your brothers these many days to this day, but have kept the charge of the commandment of Jehovah your God.
And now Jehovah your God has given rest to your brothers, as he spoke to them. Therefore now turn ye, and get you to your tents, to the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of Jehovah gave you beyond the Jordan.
Only take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law which Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded you, to love Jehovah your God, and to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and to cling to him, and to serve him with all your heart and with all your soul.
So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away, and they went to their tents.
Now to the one half-tribe of Manasseh Moses had given in Bashan, but to the other half Joshua gave among their brothers beyond the Jordan westward. Moreover when Joshua sent them away to their tents, he blessed them,
and spoke to them, saying, Return with much wealth to your tents, and with very much cattle, with silver, and with gold, and with brass, and with iron, and with very much raiment. Divide the spoil of your enemies with your brothers.
And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh returned, and departed from the sons of Israel out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan, to go to the land of Gilead, to the land of their possession, of which they were possessed, according to the commandment of Jehovah by Moses.
And when they came to the region about the Jordan that is in the land of Canaan, the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh built there an altar by the Jordan, a great altar to look upon.
And the sons of Israel heard say, Behold, the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh have built an altar in the forefront of the land of Canaan, in the region about the Jordan, on the side that pertains to the sons of Israel.
And when the sons of Israel heard of it, the whole congregation of the sons of Israel gathered themselves together at Shiloh, to go up against them to war.
And the sons of Israel sent Phinehas, the son of Eleazar the priest, to the sons of Reuben, and to the sons of Gad, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, into the land of Gilead,
and with him ten rulers, one ruler of a fathers' house for each of the tribes of Israel. And they were each man of them head of their fathers' houses among the thousands of Israel.
And they came to the sons of Reuben, and to the sons of Gad, and to the half-tribe of Manasseh, to the land of Gilead, and they spoke with them, saying,
Thus says the whole congregation of Jehovah, What trespass is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day from following Jehovah, in that ye have built for you an altar, to rebel this day against Jehovah?
Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us, from which we have not cleansed ourselves to this day, although there came a plague upon the congregation of Jehovah,
that ye must turn away this day from following Jehovah? And it will be, seeing ye rebel today against Jehovah, that tomorrow he will be angry with the whole congregation of Israel.
However, if the land of your possession is unclean, then pass ye over to the land of the possession of Jehovah, in which Jehovah's tabernacle dwells, and take possession among us, but do not rebel against Jehovah, nor rebel against us, in building for you an altar besides the altar of Jehovah our God.
Did not Achan the son of Zerah commit a trespass in what was set apart, and wrath fell upon all the congregation of Israel? And that man did not perish alone in his iniquity.
Then the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the half-tribe of Manasseh answered, and spoke to the heads of the thousands of Israel,
The Mighty One, God, Jehovah, the Mighty One, God, Jehovah, he knows, and Israel he shall know, if it is in rebellion, or if in trespass against Jehovah (do not save us this day),
that we have built us an altar to turn away from following Jehovah, or if to offer burnt offering or meal offering on it, or if to offer sacrifices of peace offerings on it, let Jehovah himself require it,
and if we have not rather out of carefulness done this, from purpose, saying, In time to come your sons might speak to our sons, saying, What have ye to do with Jehovah, the God of Israel?
For Jehovah has made the Jordan a border between us and you, ye sons of Reuben and sons of Gad. Ye have no portion in Jehovah. So your sons might make our sons cease from fearing Jehovah.
Therefore we said, Let us now prepare to build us an altar, not for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice,
but it shall be a witness between us and you, and between our generations after us, that we may do the service of Jehovah before him with our burnt offerings, and with our sacrifices, and with our peace offerings, that your sons may not say to our sons in time to come, Ye have no portion in Jehovah.
Therefore we said, It shall be, when they so say to us or to our generations in time to come, that we shall say, Behold the pattern of the altar of Jehovah, which our fathers made, not for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice, but it is a witness between us and you.
Far be it from us that we should rebel against Jehovah, and turn away this day from following Jehovah, to build an altar for burnt offering, for meal offering, or for sacrifice, besides the altar of Jehovah our God that is before his tabernacle.
And when Phinehas the priest, and the rulers of the congregation, even the heads of the thousands of Israel that were with him, heard the words that the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad and the sons of Manasseh spoke, it pleased them well.
And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest said to the sons of Reuben, and to the sons of Gad, and to the sons of Manasseh, This day we know that Jehovah is in the midst of us, because ye have not committed this trespass against Jehovah. Now ye have delivered the sons of Israel out of the hand of Jehovah.
And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the rulers, returned from the sons of Reuben, and from the sons of Gad, out of the land of Gilead, to the land of Canaan, to the sons of Israel, and brought them word again.
And the thing pleased the sons of Israel. And the sons of Israel blessed God, and spoke no more of going up against them to war, to destroy the land in which the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad dwelt.
And the sons of Reuben and the sons of Gad called the altar Witness. For, they said, it is a witness between us that Jehovah is God.

And it came to pass after many days, when Jehovah had given rest to Israel from all their enemies round about, and Joshua was old and well stricken in years,
that Joshua called for all Israel, for their elders, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers, and said to them, I am old and well stricken in years,
and ye have seen all that Jehovah your God has done to all these nations because of you, for Jehovah your God, he it is who has fought for you.
Behold, I have allotted to you these nations that remain, to be an inheritance for your tribes, from the Jordan, with all the nations that I have cut off, even to the great sea toward the going down of the sun.
And Jehovah your God, he will thrust them out from before you, and drive them from out of your sight. And ye shall possess their land, as Jehovah your God spoke to you.
Therefore be ye very courageous to keep and to do all that is written in the book of the law of Moses, that ye not turn aside therefrom to the right hand or to the left;
that ye do not come among these nations, these that remain among you, neither make mention of the name of their gods, nor cause to swear by them, neither serve them, nor bow yourselves down to them,
but cling to Jehovah your God as ye have done to this day.
For Jehovah has driven out from before you great nations and strong. But as for you, no man has stood before you to this day.
One man of you shall chase a thousand, for Jehovah your God, he it is who fights for you, as he spoke to you.
Take good heed therefore to yourselves, that ye love Jehovah your God.
Else if ye do at all go back, and cling to the remnant of these nations, even these that remain among you, and make marriages with them, and go in to them, and they to you,
know for a certainty that Jehovah your God will no more drive these nations from out of your sight, but they shall be a snare and a trap to you, and a scourge in your sides, and thorns in your eyes, until ye perish from off this good land which Jehovah your God has given you.
And, behold, this day I am going the way of all the earth. And ye know in all your hearts and in all your souls, that not one thing has failed of all the good things which Jehovah your God spoke concerning you. All have come to pass to you; not one thing has failed of it.
And it shall come to pass, that as all the good things have come upon you of which Jehovah your God spoke to you, so will Jehovah bring upon you all the evil things, until he has destroyed you from off this good land which Jehovah your God has given you.
When ye transgress the covenant of Jehovah your God, which he commanded you, and go and serve other gods, and bow down yourselves to them, then the anger of Jehovah will be kindled against you, and ye shall perish quickly from off the good land which he has given to you.

And Joshua gathered all the tribes of Israel to Shechem, and called for the elders of Israel, and for their heads, and for their judges, and for their officers; and they presented themselves before God.
Your fathers dwelt of old time beyond the River, even Terah, the father of Abraham, and the father of Nahor, and they served other gods.
And I took your father Abraham from beyond the River, and led him throughout all the land of Canaan, and multiplied his seed, and gave him Isaac.
And I gave to Isaac, Jacob and Esau. And I gave to Esau mount Seir to possess it. And Jacob and his sons went down into Egypt.
And I sent Moses and Aaron, and I plagued Egypt, according to that which I did in the midst of it, and afterward I brought you out.
And I brought your fathers out of Egypt. And ye came to the sea, and the Egyptians pursued after your fathers with chariots and with horsemen to the Red Sea.
And when they cried out to Jehovah, he put darkness between you and the Egyptians, and brought the sea upon them, and covered them. And your eyes saw what I did in Egypt, and ye dwelt in the wilderness many days.
And I brought you into the land of the Amorites, who dwelt beyond the Jordan. And they fought with you. And I gave them into your hand, and ye possessed their land, and I destroyed them from before you.
Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and fought against Israel. And he sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you,
but I would not hearken to Balaam. Therefore he blessed you greatly. So I delivered you out of his hand.
And ye went over the Jordan, and came to Jericho. And the men of Jericho fought against you, the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Girgashite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite. And I delivered them into your hand.
And I sent the hornet before you, which drove them out from before you, even the two kings of the Amorites, not with thy sword, nor with thy bow.
And I gave you a land in which thou had not labored, and cities which ye did not build, and ye dwell in it. Ye eat of vineyards and oliveyards which ye did not plant.
Now therefore fear Jehovah, and serve him in sincerity and in truth. And put away the gods which your fathers served beyond the River, and in Egypt, and serve ye Jehovah.
whether the gods which your fathers served that were beyond the River, or the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell. But as for me and my house, we will serve Jehovah.
And the people answered and said, Far be it from us that we should forsake Jehovah, to serve other gods.
For Jehovah our God, he it is who brought us and our fathers up out of the land of Egypt, from the house of bondage, and who did those great signs in our sight, and preserved us in all the way in which we went, and among all the peoples through the midst of whom we passed.
And Jehovah drove out from before us all the peoples, even the Amorites who dwelt in the land. Therefore we also will serve Jehovah, for he is our God.
And Joshua said to the people, Ye cannot serve Jehovah, for he is a holy God. He is a jealous God. He will not forgive your transgression nor your sins.
If ye forsake Jehovah, and serve foreign gods, then he will turn and do you evil, and consume you, after he has done you good.
And the people said to Joshua, No, but we will serve Jehovah.
And Joshua said to the people, Ye are witnesses against yourselves that ye have chosen for you, Jehovah, to serve him. And they said, We are witnesses.
Now therefore, he said, put away the foreign gods which are among you, and incline your heart to Jehovah, the God of Israel.
And the people said to Joshua, we will serve Jehovah our God, and we will hearken to his voice.
So Joshua made a covenant with the people that day, and set them a statute and an ordinance in Shechem.
And Joshua wrote these words in the book of the law of God. And he took a great stone, and set it up there under the oak that was by the sanctuary of Jehovah.
And Joshua said to all the people, Behold, this stone shall be a witness against us, for it has heard all the words of Jehovah which he spoke to us. It shall be therefore a witness against you, lest ye deny your God.
So Joshua sent the people away, every man to his inheritance.
And it came to pass after these things, that Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died, being a hundred and ten years old.
And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnathserah, which is in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the north of the mountain of Gaash.
And Israel served Jehovah all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua, and had known all the work of Jehovah that he had wrought for Israel.
And they buried the bones of Joseph, which the sons of Israel brought up out of Egypt, in Sicima, in the portion of the land which Jacob bought from the Amorites who dwelt in Sicima for a hundred ewe-lambs. And he gave it to Joseph for a portion.
And Eleazar the son of Aaron died. And they buried him in the hill of Phinehas his son, which was given him in the hill-country of Ephraim.

Judges

And it came to pass after the death of Joshua, that the sons of Israel asked of Jehovah, saying, Who shall go up for us first against the Canaanites, to fight against them?
And Jehovah said, Judah shall go up. Behold, I have delivered the land into his hand.
And Judah said to Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites, and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot. So Simeon went with him.
And Judah went up, and Jehovah delivered the Canaanites and the Perizzites into their hand, and they smote of them in Bezek ten thousand men.
And they found Adoni-bezek in Bezek, and they fought against him, and they smote the Canaanites and the Perizzites.
But Adoni-bezek fled, and they pursued after him, and caught him, and cut off his thumbs and his great toes.
And Adoni-bezek said, Seventy kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut off, gathered scraps under my table. As I have done, so God has requited me. And they brought him to Jerusalem, and he died there.
And the sons of Judah fought against Jerusalem, and took it, and smote it with the edge of the sword, and set the city on fire.
And afterward the sons of Judah went down to fight against the Canaanites who dwelt in the hill-country, and in the South, and in the lowland.
And Judah went against the Canaanites who dwelt in Hebron (now the name of Hebron was formerly Kiriath-arba), and they smote Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai.
And from there he went against the inhabitants of Debir. (Now the name of Debir was formerly Kiriath-sepher.)
And Caleb said, He who smites Kiriath-sepher, and takes it, I will give to him Achsah my daughter to wife.
And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it, and he gave him Achsah his daughter to wife.
And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask of her father a field. And she alighted from off her donkey, and Caleb said to her, What would thou?
And she said to him, Give me a blessing, since thou have set me in the land of the South, give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper springs and the nether springs.
And the sons of the Kenite, Moses' brother-in-law, went up out of the city of palm trees with the sons of Judah into the wilderness of Judah, which is in the south of Arad, and they went and dwelt with the people.
And Judah went with Simeon his brother, and they smote the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly destroyed it. And the name of the city was called Hormah.
Also Judah took Gaza with the border of it, and Ashkelon with the border of it, and Ekron with the border of it.
And Jehovah was with Judah, and drove out those of the hill-country. But they could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley because they had chariots of iron.
And they gave Hebron to Caleb, as Moses had spoken, and he drove out the three sons of Anak from there.
And the sons of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites who inhabited Jerusalem, but the Jebusites dwell with the sons of Benjamin in Jerusalem to this day.
And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel, and Jehovah was with them.
And the house of Joseph sent to spy out Bethel. (Now the name of the city was formerly Luz.)
And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city, and they said to him, Show us, we pray thee, the entrance into the city, and we will deal kindly with thee.
And he showed them the entrance into the city. And they smote the city with the edge of the sword, but they let the man go and all his family.
And the man went into the land of the Hittites, and built a city, and called the name of it Luz, which is the name of it to this day.
And Manasseh did not drive out those of Beth-shean and its towns, nor of Taanach and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Ibleam and its towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and its towns, but the Canaanites would dwell in that land.
And it came to pass, when Israel grew strong, that they put the Canaanites to task work, and did not utterly drive them out.
And Ephraim did not drive out the Canaanites who dwelt in Gezer, but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them.
Zebulun did not drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the inhabitants of Nahalol, but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became subject to task work.
Asher did not drive out the inhabitants of Acco, nor the inhabitants of Sidon, nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor of Helbah, nor of Aphik, nor of Rehob,
but the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land, for they did not drive them out.
Naphtali did not drive out the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh, nor the inhabitants of Beth-anath, but he dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land. Nevertheless the inhabitants of Beth-shemesh and of Beth-anath became subject to task work.
And the Amorites forced the sons of Dan into the hill-country, for they would not allow them to come down to the valley,
but the Amorites would dwell in mount Heres, in Aijalon, and in Shaalbim. Yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became subject to task work.
And the border of the Amorites was from the ascent of Akrabbim, from the rock, and upward.

And the agent of Jehovah came up from Gilgal to Bochim. And he said, I made you go up out of Egypt, and have brought you to the land which I swore to your fathers. And I said, I will never break my covenant with you.
And ye shall make no covenant with the inhabitants of this land. Ye shall break down their altars. But ye have not hearkened to my voice. Why have ye done this?
Therefore I also said, I will not drive them out from before you, but they shall be as thorns in your sides, and their gods shall be a snare to you.
And it came to pass, when the agent of Jehovah spoke these words to all the sons of Israel, that the people lifted up their voice, and wept.
And they called the name of that place Bochim, and they sacrificed there to Jehovah.
Now when Joshua had sent the people away, the sons of Israel went every man to his inheritance to possess the land.
And the people served Jehovah all the days of Joshua, and all the days of the elders who outlived Joshua, who had seen all the great work of Jehovah that he had wrought for Israel.
And Joshua the son of Nun, the servant of Jehovah, died, being a hundred and ten years old.
And they buried him in the border of his inheritance in Timnath-heres, in the hill-country of Ephraim, on the north of the mountain of Gaash.
And also all that generation were gathered to their fathers. And there arose another generation after them that did not know Jehovah, nor yet the work which he had wrought for Israel.
And the sons of Israel did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and served the Baalim.
And they forsook Jehovah, the God of their fathers, who brought them out of the land of Egypt, and followed other gods, of the gods of the peoples that were round about them, and bowed themselves down to them. And they provoked Jehovah to anger.
And they forsook Jehovah, and served Baal and the Ashtaroth.
And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel, and he delivered them into the hands of spoilers that despoiled them. And he sold them into the hands of their enemies round about, so that they could not any longer stand before their enemies.
Wherever they went out, the hand of Jehovah was against them for evil, as Jehovah had spoken, and as Jehovah had sworn to them. And they were exceedingly distressed.
And Jehovah raised up judges who saved them out of the hand of those who despoiled them.
And yet they did not hearken to their judges, for they played the harlot after other gods, and bowed themselves down to them. They turned aside quickly out of the way in which their fathers walked, obeying the commandments of Jehovah. They did not do so.
And when Jehovah raised up judges for them, then Jehovah was with the judge, and saved them out of the hand of their enemies all the days of the judge. For Jehovah regretted because of their groaning because of those who oppressed them and vexed them.
But it came to pass, when the judge was dead, that they turned back, and dealt more corruptly than their fathers, in following other gods to serve them, and to bow down to them. They did not cease from their doings, nor from their stubborn way.
And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel, and he said, Because this nation has transgressed my covenant which I commanded their fathers, and has not hearkened to my voice,
I also will not henceforth drive out any from before them of the nations that Joshua left when he died,
that by them I may prove Israel, whether they will keep the way of Jehovah to walk in it, as their fathers kept it, or not.
So Jehovah left those nations, without driving them out quickly. Neither did he deliver them into the hand of Joshua.

Now these are the nations which Jehovah left to prove Israel by them, (even as many of Israel as had not known all the wars of Canaan,
namely, the five lords of the Philistines, and all the Canaanites, and the Sidonians, and the Hivites that dwelt in mount Lebanon, from mount Baal-hermon to the entrance of Hamath.
And they were left, to prove Israel by them, to know whether they would hearken to the commandments of Jehovah, which he commanded their fathers by Moses.
And the sons of Israel dwelt among the Canaanites, the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.
And they took their daughters to be their wives, and gave their own daughters to their sons and served their gods.
And the sons of Israel did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and forgot Jehovah their God, and served the Baalim and the Asheroth.
Therefore the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia, And the sons of Israel served Cushan-rishathaim eight years.
And when the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, Jehovah raised up a savior to the sons of Israel, who saved them, even Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother.
And the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him, and he judged Israel. And he went out to war, and Jehovah delivered Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia into his hand, and his hand prevailed against Cushan-rishathaim.
And the land had rest forty years. And Othniel the son of Kenaz died.
And the sons of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. And Jehovah strengthened Eglon the king of Moab against Israel because they had done that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
And he gathered to him the sons of Ammon and Amalek, and he went and smote Israel, and they possessed the city of palm trees.
And the sons of Israel served Eglon the king of Moab eighteen years.
But when the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, Jehovah raised up for them a savior, Ehud the son of Gera, the Benjamite, a left-handed man. And the sons of Israel sent tribute by him to Eglon the king of Moab.
And Ehud made for himself a sword which had two edges, a cubit in length. And he girded it under his raiment upon his right thigh.
And he offered the tribute to Eglon king of Moab. Now Eglon was a very fat man.
And when he had made an end of offering the tribute, he sent away the men who bore the tribute.
But he himself turned back from the quarries that were by Gilgal, and said, I have a secret errand to thee, O king. And he said, Keep silence. And all who stood by him went out from him.
And Ehud came to him. And he was sitting by himself alone in the cool upper room. And Ehud said, I have a message from God to thee. And he arose out of his seat.
And Ehud put forth his left hand, and took the sword from his right thigh, and thrust it into his body.
And the handle also went in after the blade, and the fat closed upon the blade, for he did not draw the sword out of his body, and it came out behind.
Then Ehud went forth into the porch, and shut the doors of the upper room upon him, and locked them.
Now when he was gone out, his servants came, and they saw, and, behold, the doors of the upper room were locked. And they said, Surely he is covering his feet in the upper chamber.
And they delayed till they were ashamed, and, behold, he did not open the doors of the upper room. Therefore they took the key, and opened, and, behold, their lord was fallen down dead on the earth.
And Ehud escaped while they delayed, and passed beyond the quarries, and escaped to Seirah.
And it came to pass, when he came, that he blew a trumpet in the hill-country of Ephraim. And the sons of Israel went down with him from the hill-country, and he before them.
And he said to them, Follow after me, for Jehovah has delivered your enemies the Moabites into your hand. And they went down after him, and took the fords of the Jordan against the Moabites, and did not allow a man to pass over.
And they smote about ten thousand men of Moab at that time, every robust man, and every man of valor, and there escaped not a man.
So Moab was subdued that day under the hand of Israel. And the land had rest eighty years.
And after him was Shamgar the son of Anath, who smote six hundred men of the Philistines with an ox-goad, and he also saved Israel.

And the sons of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, when Ehud was dead.
And Jehovah sold them into the hand of Jabin king of Canaan who reigned in Hazor, the captain of whose army was Sisera who dwelt in Harosheth of the Gentiles.
And the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, for he had nine hundred chariots of iron, and he mightily oppressed the sons of Israel twenty years.
Now Deborah, a prophetess, the wife of Lappidoth, she judged Israel at that time.
And she dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah between Ramah and Bethel in the hill-country of Ephraim, and the sons of Israel came up to her for judgment.
And she sent and called Barak the son of Abinoam out of Kedesh-naphtali, and said to him, Has not Jehovah, the God of Israel, commanded, saying, Go and approach to mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand men of the sons of Naphtali and of the sons of Zebulun?
And I will draw Sisera, the captain of Jabin's army, to thee, to the river Kishon, with his chariots and his multitude, and I will deliver him into thy hand.
And Barak said to her, If thou will go with me, then I will go, but if thou will not go with me, I will not go.
And she said, I will surely go with thee. Notwithstanding, the journey that thou take shall not be for thine honor, for Jehovah will sell Sisera into the hand of a woman. And Deborah arose, and went with Barak to Kedesh.
And Barak called Zebulun and Naphtali together to Kedesh. And there went up ten thousand men at his feet, and Deborah went up with him.
Now Heber the Kenite had separated himself from the Kenites, even from the sons of Hobab the brother-in-law of Moses, and had pitched his tent as far as the oak in Zaanannim, which is by Kedesh.
And they told Sisera that Barak the son of Abinoam was gone up to mount Tabor.
And Sisera gathered together all his chariots, even nine hundred chariots of iron, and all the people that were with him, from Harosheth of the Gentiles, to the river Kishon.
And Deborah said to Barak, Up, for this is the day in which Jehovah has delivered Sisera into thy hand. Has not Jehovah gone out before thee? So Barak went down from mount Tabor, and ten thousand men after him.
And Jehovah discomfited Sisera, and all his chariots, and all his army, with the edge of the sword before Barak. And Sisera alighted from his chariot, and fled away on his feet.
But Barak pursued after the chariots, and after the army, to Harosheth of the Gentiles. And all the army of Sisera fell by the edge of the sword. There was not a man left.
However Sisera fled away on his feet to the tent of Jael the wife of Heber the Kenite, for there was peace between Jabin the king of Hazor and the house of Heber the Kenite.
And Jael went out to meet Sisera, and said to him, Turn in, my lord, turn in to me; fear not. And he turned in to her into the tent, and she covered him with a rug.
And he said to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water to drink, for I am thirsty. And she opened a bottle of milk, and gave him drink, and covered him.
And he said to her, Stand in the door of the tent, and it shall be, when any man comes and inquires of thee, and says, Is there any man here? that thou shall say, No.
Then Jael Heber's wife took a tent-pin, and took a hammer in her hand, and went softly to him, and struck the pin into his temples, and it pierced through into the ground, for he was in a deep sleep, so he fainted and died.
And, behold, as Barak pursued Sisera, Jael came out to meet him, and said to him, Come, and I will show thee the man whom thou seek. And he came to her, and, behold, Sisera lay dead, and the tent-pin was in his temples.
So God subdued on that day Jabin the king of Canaan before the sons of Israel.
And the hand of the sons of Israel prevailed more and more against Jabin the king of Canaan until they had destroyed Jabin king of Canaan.

Then Deborah and Barak the son of Abinoam sang on that day, saying,
That the leaders took the lead in Israel, that the people offered themselves willingly, bless ye Jehovah.
Hear, O ye kings. Give ear, O ye rulers. I, even I, will sing to Jehovah. I will sing praise to Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Jehovah, when thou went forth out of Seir, when thou marched out of the field of Edom, the earth trembled, the heavens also dropped, yea, the clouds dropped water.
The mountains quaked at the presence of Jehovah, even yon Sinai at the presence of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
In the days of Shamgar the son of Anath, in the days of Jael, the highways were unoccupied, and the travelers walked through byways.
The rulers ceased in Israel, they ceased, until that I, Deborah, arose, that I arose a mother in Israel.
They chose new gods, then war was in the gates. Was there a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel?
My heart is toward the governors of Israel, who offered themselves willingly among the people. Bless ye Jehovah.
Tell, ye who ride on white donkeys, ye who sit on rich carpets, and ye who walk by the way.
Far from the noise of archers, in the places of drawing water, there they shall rehearse the righteous acts of Jehovah, the righteous acts of his rule in Israel. Then the people of Jehovah went down to the gates.
Awake, awake, Deborah, awake, awake, utter a song. Arise, Barak, and lead away thy captives, thou son of Abinoam.
Then a remnant of the nobles and the people came down. Jehovah came down for me against the mighty.
Out of Ephraim, those whose root is in Amalek, after thee, Benjamin, among thy peoples, out of Machir, came down governors, and out of Zebulun those who handle the marshal's staff.
And the princes of Issachar were with Deborah, as was Issachar, so was Barak, into the valley they rushed forth at his feet. By the watercourses of Reuben there were great resolves of heart.
Why did thou sit among the sheepfolds, to hear the pipings for the flocks? At the watercourses of Reuben there were great searchings of heart.
Gilead abode beyond the Jordan. And Dan, why did he remain in ships? Asher sat still at the haven of the sea, and abode by his creeks.
Zebulun was a people who jeopardized their lives to the death, and Naphtali, upon the high places of the field.
The kings came and fought. Then the kings of Canaan fought in Taanach by the waters of Megiddo. They took no gain of money.
From heaven the stars fought; from their courses they fought against Sisera.
The river Kishon swept them away, that ancient river, the river Kishon. O my soul, march on with strength.
Then the horse hoofs stamped by reason of the prancings, the prancings of their strong ones.
Curse ye Meroz, said the agent of Jehovah. Curse ye bitterly the inhabitants of it, because they did not come to the help of Jehovah, to the help of Jehovah against the mighty.
Blessed above women shall Jael be, the wife of Heber the Kenite. Blessed shall she be above women in the tent.
He asked water. She gave him milk. She brought him butter in a lordly dish.
She put her hand to the tent-pin, and her right hand to the workmen's hammer. And with the hammer she smote Sisera; she struck through his head. Yea, she pierced and struck through his temples.
At her feet he bowed, he fell, he lay. At her feet he bowed, he fell. Where he bowed, there he fell down dead.
Through the window she looked forth, and cried-the mother of Sisera through the lattice-Why is his chariot so long in coming? Why do the wheels of his chariots delay?
Her wise ladies answered her, yea, she returned answer to herself,
Have they not found, have they not divided the spoil? A damsel, two damsels to every man, to Sisera a spoil of dyed garments, a spoil of dyed garments embroidered, of dyed garments embroidered on both sides, on the necks of the spoil?
So let all thine enemies perish, O Jehovah, but let those who love him be as the sun when he goes forth in his might. And the land had rest forty years.

And the sons of Israel did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and Jehovah delivered them into the hand of Midian seven years.
And the hand of Midian prevailed against Israel. And because of Midian the sons of Israel made for themselves the dens which are in the mountains, and the caves, and the strongholds.
And so it was, when Israel had sown, that the Midianites came up, and the Amalekites, and the sons of the east, they came up against them.
And they encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, till thou come to Gaza, and left no sustenance in Israel, neither sheep, nor ox, nor donkey.
For they came up with their cattle and their tents. They came in as locusts for multitude. Both they and their camels were without number, and they came into the land to destroy it.
And Israel was brought very low because of Midian, and the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah.
And it came to pass, when the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah because of Midian,
that Jehovah sent a prophet to the sons of Israel. And he said to them, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, I brought you up from Egypt, and brought you forth out of the house of bondage.
And I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all that oppressed you, and drove them out from before you, and gave you their land.
And I said to you, I am Jehovah your God. Ye shall not fear the gods of the Amorites, in whose land ye dwell, but ye have not hearkened to my voice.
And the agent of Jehovah came, and sat under the oak which was in Ophrah that pertained to Joash the Abiezrite. And his son Gideon was beating out wheat in the winepress, to hide it from the Midianites.
And the agent of Jehovah appeared to him, and said to him, Jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of valor.
And Gideon said to him, Oh, my lord, if Jehovah is with us, then why has all this befallen us? And where are all his wondrous works which our fathers told us of, saying, Did not Jehovah bring us up from Egypt? But now Jehovah has cast us off, and delivered us into the hand of Midian.
And Jehovah looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and save Israel from the hand of Midian. Have I not sent thee?
And he said to him, Oh, Lord, with what shall I save Israel? Behold, my family is the poorest in Manasseh, and I am the least in my father's house.
And Jehovah said to him, Surely I will be with thee, and thou shall smite the Midianites as one man.
And he said to him, If now I have found favor in thy sight, then show me a sign that it is thou who talk with me.
Depart not from here, I pray thee, until I come to thee, and bring forth my present, and lay it before thee. And he said, I will tarry until thou come again.
And Gideon went in, and made ready a kid, and unleavened cakes of an ephah of meal. He put the flesh in a basket, and he put the broth in a pot, and brought it out to him under the oak, and presented it.
And the agent of God said to him, Take the flesh and the unleavened cakes, and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did so.
Then the agent of Jehovah put forth the end of the staff that was in his hand, and touched the flesh and the unleavened cakes. And there went up fire out of the rock, and consumed the flesh and the unleavened cakes. And the agent of Jehovah departed out of his sight.
And Gideon saw that he was the agent of Jehovah. And Gideon said, Alas, O lord Jehovah! Inasmuch as I have seen the agent of Jehovah face to face.
And Jehovah said to him, Peace be to thee. Fear not; thou shall not die.
Then Gideon built an altar there to Jehovah, and called it Jehovah-shalom. To this day it is yet in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
And it came to pass the same night, that Jehovah said to him, Take thy father's bullock, even the second bullock seven years old, and throw down the altar of Baal that thy father has, and cut down the Asherah that is by it.
And build an altar to Jehovah thy God upon the top of this stronghold, in the orderly manner, and take the second bullock, and offer a burnt offering with the wood of the Asherah which thou shall cut down.
Then Gideon took ten men of his servants, and did as Jehovah had spoken to him. And it came to pass, because he feared his father's household and the men of the city, so that he could not do it by day, that he did it by night.
And when the men of the city arose early in the morning, behold, the altar of Baal was broken down, and the Asherah was cut down that was by it, and the second bullock was offered upon the altar that was built.
And they said one to another, Who has done this thing? And when they inquired and asked, they said, Gideon the son of Joash has done this thing.
Then the men of the city said to Joash, Bring out thy son, that he may die, because he has broken down the altar of Baal, and because he has cut down the Asherah that was by it.
And Joash said to all who stood against him, Will ye contend for Baal? Or will ye save him? He who will contend for him, let him be put to death while it is morning. If he be a god, let him contend for himself because he has broken down his altar.
Therefore on that day he called him Jerubbaal, saying, Let Baal contend against him because he has broken down his altar.
Then all the Midianites and the Amalekites and the sons of the east assembled themselves together. And they passed over, and encamped in the valley of Jezreel.
But the Spirit of Jehovah came upon Gideon, and he blew a trumpet, and Abiezer was gathered together after him.
And he sent messengers throughout all Manasseh, and they also were gathered together after him. And he sent messengers to Asher, and to Zebulun, and to Naphtali, and they came up to meet them.
And Gideon said to God, If thou will save Israel by my hand, as thou have spoken,
behold, I will put a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor. If there be dew on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the ground, then I shall know that thou will save Israel by my hand as thou have spoken.
And it was so, for he rose up early on the morrow, and pressed the fleece together, and wrung the dew out of the fleece, a bowlful of water.
And Gideon said to God, Let not thine anger be kindled against me, and I will speak but this once. Let me make trial, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece. Let it now be dry only upon the fleece, and upon all the ground let there be dew.
And God did so that night, for it was dry upon the fleece only, and there was dew on all the ground.

Then Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, and all the people who were with him, rose up early, and encamped beside the spring of Harod. And the camp of Midian was on the north side of them, by the hill of Moreh, in the valley.
And Jehovah said to Gideon, The people who are with thee are too many for me to give the Midianites into their hand, lest Israel vaunt themselves against me, saying, My own hand has saved me.
Now therefore proclaim in the ears of the people, saying, Whoever is fearful and trembling, let him return and depart from mount Gilead. And there returned of the people twenty-two thousand, and there remained ten thousand.
And Jehovah said to Gideon, The people are yet too many. Bring them down to the water, and I will try them for thee there. And it shall be, that of whom I say to thee, This man shall go with thee, the same shall go with thee, and of whomever I say to thee, This man shall not go with thee, the same shall not go.
So he brought down the people to the water. And Jehovah said to Gideon, Everyone who laps of the water with his tongue, as a dog laps, him thou shall set by himself. Likewise everyone who bows down upon his knees to drink.
And the number of those who lapped, putting their hand to their mouth, was three hundred men, but all the rest of the people bowed down upon their knees to drink water.
And Jehovah said to Gideon, By the three hundred men who lapped I will save you, and deliver the Midianites into thy hand. And let all the people go every man to his place.
So the people took provision in their hand, and their trumpets. And he sent all the men of Israel every man to his tent, but retained the three hundred men. And the camp of Midian was beneath him in the valley.
And it came to pass the same night, that Jehovah said to him, Arise, get thee down into the camp, for I have delivered it into thy hand.
But if thou fear to go down, go thou with Purah thy servant down to the camp.
And thou shall hear what they say, and afterward thy hands shall be strengthened to go down into the camp. Then he went down with Purah his servant to the outermost part of the armed men who were in the camp.
And the Midianites and the Amalekites and all the sons of the east lay along in the valley like locusts for multitude, and their camels were without number, as the sand which is upon the sea-shore for multitude.
And when Gideon came, behold, there was a man telling a dream to his fellow. And he said, Behold, I dreamed a dream. And, lo, a cake of barley bread tumbled into the camp of Midian, and came to the tent, and smote it so that it fell, and turned it upside down so that the tent lay flat.
And his fellow answered and said, This is nothing else except the sword of Gideon the son of Joash, a man of Israel. Into his hand God has delivered Midian, and all the army.
And it was so, when Gideon heard the telling of the dream, and the interpretation of it, that he worshiped. And he returned into the camp of Israel, and said, Arise, for Jehovah has delivered the army of Midian into your hand.
And he divided the three hundred men into three companies, and he put trumpets into the hands of all of them, and empty pitchers, with torches inside the pitchers.
And he said to them, Look on me, and do likewise, and, behold, when I come to the outermost part of the camp, it shall be that, as I do, so ye shall do.
When I blow the trumpet, I and all who are with me, then blow ye the trumpets also on every side of all the camp, and say, For Jehovah and for Gideon.
So Gideon, and the hundred men who were with him, came to the outermost part of the camp in the beginning of the middle watch when they had but newly set the watch. And they blew the trumpets, and broke in pieces the pitchers that were in their hands.
And the three companies blew the trumpets, and broke the pitchers, and held the torches in their left hands, and the trumpets in their right hands with which to blow. And they cried out, The sword of Jehovah and of Gideon.
And they stood every man in his place round about the camp. And all the army ran, and they shouted, and put them to flight.
And they blew the three hundred trumpets, and Jehovah set every man's sword against his fellow, and against all the army. And the army fled as far as Beth-shittah toward Zererah, as far as the border of Abel-meholah, by Tabbath.
And the men of Israel were gathered together out of Naphtali, and out of Asher, and out of all Manasseh, and pursued after Midian.
And Gideon sent messengers throughout all the hill-country of Ephraim, saying, Come down against Midian, and take before them the waters, as far as Beth-barah, even the Jordan. So all the men of Ephraim were gathered together, and took the waters as far as Beth-barah, even the Jordan.
And they took the two princes of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb. And they killed Oreb at the rock of Oreb, and Zeeb they killed at the winepress of Zeeb, and pursued Midian. And they brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to Gideon beyond the Jordan.

And the men of Ephraim said to him, Why have thou done thus to us, that thou did not call us when thou went to fight with Midian? And they chided with him sharply.
And he said to them, What have I now done in comparison with you? Is not the gleaning of the grapes of Ephraim better than the vintage of Abiezer?
God has delivered into your hand the rulers of Midian, Oreb and Zeeb, and what was I able to do in comparison with you? Then their anger was abated toward him when he had said that.
And Gideon came to the Jordan, and passed over, he, and the three hundred men who were with him, faint, yet pursuing.
And he said to the men of Succoth, Give, I pray you, loaves of bread to the people who follow me, for they are faint, and I am pursuing after Zebah and Zalmunna, the kings of Midian.
And the rulers of Succoth said, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy hand that we should give bread to thine army?
And Gideon said, Therefore when Jehovah has delivered Zebah and Zalmunna into my hand, then I will tear your flesh with the thorns of the wilderness and with briers.
And he went up from there to Penuel, and spoke to them in like manner, and the men of Penuel answered him as the men of Succoth had answered.
And he spoke also to the men of Penuel, saying, When I come again in peace, I will break down this tower.
Now Zebah and Zalmunna were in Karkor, and their armies with them, about fifteen thousand men, all who were left of all the army of the sons of the east, for there fell a hundred and twenty thousand men who drew a sword.
And Gideon went up by the way of those who dwelt in tents on the east of Nobah and Jogbehah, and smote the army, for the army was confident.
And Zebah and Zalmunna fled, and he pursued after them. And he took the two kings of Midian, Zebah and Zalmunna, and discomfited all the army.
And Gideon the son of Joash returned from the battle from the ascent of Heres.
And he caught a young man of the men of Succoth, and inquired of him. And he described for him the rulers of Succoth, and the elders of it, seventy-seven men.
And he came to the men of Succoth, and said, Behold Zebah and Zalmunna, concerning whom ye taunted me, saying, Are the hands of Zebah and Zalmunna now in thy hand, that we should give bread to thy men who are weary?
And he took the elders of the city, and thorns of the wilderness and briers, and with them he taught the men of Succoth.
And he broke down the tower of Penuel, and killed the men of the city.
Then he said to Zebah and Zalmunna, What manner of men were they whom ye killed at Tabor? And they answered, As thou are, so were they. Each one resembled the sons of a king.
And he said, They were my brothers, the sons of my mother. As Jehovah lives, if ye had saved them alive, I would not kill you.
And he said to Jether his firstborn, Up, and kill them. But the youth did not draw his sword, for he feared because he was yet a youth.
Then Zebah and Zalmunna said, Rise thou, and fall upon us, for as the man is, so is his strength. And Gideon arose, and killed Zebah and Zalmunna, and took the crescents that were on their camels' necks.
Then the men of Israel said to Gideon, Rule thou over us, both thou, and thy son, and thy son's son also, for thou have saved us out of the hand of Midian.
And Gideon said to them, I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you. Jehovah shall rule over you.
And Gideon said to them, I would make a request of you, that ye would give me every man the earrings of his spoil. (For they had golden earrings, because they were Ishmaelites.)
And they answered, We will willingly give them. And they spread a garment, and cast in it every man the earrings of his spoil.
And the weight of the golden earrings that he requested was a thousand and seven hundred shekels of gold, besides the crescents, and the pendants, and the purple raiment that was on the kings of Midian, and besides the chains that were about their camels' necks.
And Gideon made an ephod of it, and put it in his city, even in Ophrah. And all Israel played the harlot after it there, and it became a snare to Gideon, and to his house.
So Midian was subdued before the sons of Israel, and they lifted up their heads no more. And the land had rest forty years in the days of Gideon.
And Jerubbaal the son of Joash went and dwelt in his own house.
And Gideon had seventy sons begotten from his body, for he had many wives.
And his concubine who was in Shechem, she also bore him a son, and he called his name Abimelech.
And Gideon the son of Joash died in a good old age, and was buried in the sepulcher of Joash his father, in Ophrah of the Abiezrites.
And it came to pass, as soon as Gideon was dead, that the sons of Israel turned again, and played the harlot after the Baalim, and made Baal-berith their god.
And the sons of Israel did not remember Jehovah their God, who had delivered them out of the hand of all their enemies on every side,
neither did they show kindness to the house of Jerubbaal, who is Gideon, according to all the goodness which he had shown to Israel.

And Abimelech the son of Jerubbaal went to Shechem to his mother's brothers, and spoke with them, and with all the family of the house of his mother's father, saying,
Speak, I pray you, in the ears of all the men of Shechem, Which is better for you, that all the sons of Jerubbaal, who are seventy men, rule over you, or that one rule over you? Remember also that I am your bone and your flesh.
And his mother's brothers spoke of him in the ears of all the men of Shechem all these words. And their hearts inclined to follow Abimelech, for they said, He is our brother.
And they gave him seventy pieces of silver out of the house of Baal-berith, with which Abimelech hired vain and unstable fellows who followed him.
And he went to his father's house at Ophrah, and killed his brothers the sons of Jerubbaal, being seventy men, upon one stone, but Jotham the youngest son of Jerubbaal was left, for he hid himself.
And all the men of Shechem assembled themselves together, and all the house of Millo, and went and made Abimelech king by the oak of the pillar that was in Shechem.
And when they told it to Jotham, he went and stood on the top of mount Gerizim, and lifted up his voice, and cried out, and said to them, Hearken to me, ye men of Shechem, that God may hearken to you.
The trees went forth a time to anoint a king over them. And they said to the olive tree, Reign thou over us.
But the olive tree said to them, Should I leave my fatness with which by me they honor God and man, and go to wave to and fro over the trees?
And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and reign over us.
But the fig tree said to them, Should I leave my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to wave to and fro over the trees?
And the trees said to the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.
And the vine said to them, Should I leave my new wine, which cheers God and man, and go to wave to and fro over the trees?
Then all the trees said to the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us.
And the bramble said to the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and take refuge in my shade, and if not, let fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon.
Now therefore, if ye have dealt truly and uprightly, in that ye have made Abimelech king, and if ye have dealt well with Jerubbaal and his house, and have done to him according to the deed of his hands
(for my father fought for you, and ventured his life, and delivered you out of the hand of Midian,
and ye have risen up against my father's house this day, and have slain his sons, seventy men, upon one stone, and have made Abimelech, the son of his maid-servant, king over the men of Shechem because he is your brother),
if ye then have dealt truly and uprightly with Jerubbaal and with his house this day, then rejoice ye in Abimelech, and let him also rejoice in you.
But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of Shechem, and the house of Millo, and let fire come out from the men of Shechem, and from the house of Millo, and devour Abimelech.
And Jotham ran away, and fled, and went to Beer, and dwelt there, for fear of Abimelech his brother.
And Abimelech was ruler over Israel three years.
And God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the men of Shechem, and the men of Shechem dealt treacherously with Abimelech,
that the violence done to the seventy sons of Jerubbaal might come, and that their blood might be laid upon Abimelech their brother who killed them, and upon the men of Shechem who strengthened his hands to kill his brothers.
And the men of Shechem set ambushes for him on the tops of the mountains, and they robbed all who came along that way by them, and it was told Abimelech.
And Gaal the son of Ebed came with his brothers, and went over to Shechem, and the men of Shechem put their trust in him.
And they went out into the field, and gathered their vineyards, and trod the grapes, and held festival, and went into the house of their god, and ate and drank, and cursed Abimelech.
And Gaal the son of Ebed said, Who is Abimelech, and who is Shechem, that we should serve him? Is not he the son of Jerubbaal, and Zebul his officer? Serve ye the men of Hamor the father of Shechem, but why should we serve him?
And would that this people were under my hand! Then I would remove Abimelech. And he said to Abimelech, Increase thine army, and come out.
And when Zebul the ruler of the city heard the words of Gaal the son of Ebed, his anger was kindled.
And he sent messengers to Abimelech privately, saying, Behold, Gaal the son of Ebed and his brothers have come to Shechem, and, behold, they are fortifying the city against thee.
Now therefore, up by night, thou and the people who are with thee, and lie in wait in the field.
And it shall be, that in the morning, as soon as the sun is up, thou shall rise early, and rush upon the city, and, behold, when he and the people who are with him come out against thee, then thou may do to them as thou shall find occasion.
And Abimelech rose up, and all the people who were with him, by night, and they laid wait against Shechem in four companies.
And Gaal the son of Ebed went out, and stood in the entrance of the gate of the city. And Abimelech rose up, and the people who were with him, from the ambushment.
And when Gaal saw the people, he said to Zebul, Behold, there comes a people down from the tops of the mountains. And Zebul said to him, Thou see the shadow of the mountains as if they were men.
And Gaal spoke again and said, See, there comes a people down by the middle of the land, and one company comes by the way of the oak of Meonenim.
Then Zebul said to him, Where is now thy mouth, that thou said, Who is Abimelech, that we should serve him? Is not this the people that thou have despised? Go out now, I pray, and fight with them.
And Gaal went out before the men of Shechem, and fought with Abimelech.
And Abimelech chased him, and he fled before him, and there fell many wounded, even to the entrance of the gate.
And Abimelech dwelt at Arumah, and Zebul drove out Gaal and his brothers, that they should not dwell in Shechem.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people went out into the field, and they told Abimelech.
And he took the people, and divided them into three companies, and laid wait in the field. And he looked, and, behold, the people came forth out of the city. And he rose up against them, and smote them.
And Abimelech, and the companies who were with him, rushed forward, and stood in the entrance of the gate of the city, and the two companies rushed upon all who were in the field, and smote them.
And Abimelech fought against the city all that day. And he took the city, and killed the people that were in it, and he beat down the city, and sowed it with salt.
And when all the men of the tower of Shechem heard of it, they entered into the stronghold of the house of El-berith.
And it was told Abimelech that all the men of the tower of Shechem were gathered together.
And Abimelech got up to mount Zalmon, he and all the people who were with him. And Abimelech took an axe in his hand, and cut down a bough from the trees, and took it up, and laid it on his shoulder. And he said to the people who were with him, What ye have seen me do, make haste, and do as I have done.
And all the people likewise cut down every man his bough, and followed Abimelech, and put them to the stronghold, and set the stronghold on fire upon them, so that all the men of the tower of Shechem died also, about a thousand men and women.
Then Abimelech went to Thebez, and encamped against Thebez, and took it.
But there was a strong tower inside the city. And all the men and women fled, and all those of the city, and shut themselves in, and got up to the roof of the tower.
And Abimelech came to the tower, and fought against it, and drew near to the door of the tower to burn it with fire.
And a certain woman cast an upper millstone upon Abimelech's head, and broke his skull.
Then he called hastily to the young man his armor bearer, and said to him, Draw thy sword, and kill me, that men not say of me, A woman killed him. And his young man thrust him through, and he died.
And when the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, they departed every man to his place.
Thus God requited the wickedness of Abimelech, which he did to his father, in slaying his seventy brothers.
And God requited all the wickedness of the men of Shechem upon their heads. And the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal came upon them.

And after Abimelech there arose Tola the son of Puah, the son of Dodo, a man of Issachar, to save Israel, and he dwelt in Shamir in the hill-country of Ephraim.
And he judged Israel twenty-three years, and died, and was buried in Shamir.
And after him arose Jair, the Gileadite, and he judged Israel twenty-two years.
And he had thirty sons who rode on thirty donkey colts, and they had thirty cities, which are called Havvoth-jair to this day, which are in the land of Gilead.
And Jair died, and was buried in Kamon.
And the sons of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and served the Baalim, and the Ashtaroth, and the gods of Syria, and the gods of Sidon, and the gods of Moab, and the gods of the sons of Ammon, and the gods of the Philistines. And they forsook Jehovah, and did not serve him.
And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel, and he sold them into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the sons of Ammon.
And they vexed and oppressed the sons of Israel that year. Eighteen years they oppressed all the sons of Israel who were beyond the Jordan in the land of the Amorites, which is in Gilead.
And the sons of Ammon passed over the Jordan to also fight against Judah, and against Benjamin, and against the house of Ephraim, so that Israel was exceedingly distressed.
And the sons of Israel cried to Jehovah, saying, We have sinned against thee, even because we have forsaken our God, and have served the Baalim.
And Jehovah said to the sons of Israel, Did not I save you from the Egyptians, and from the Amorites, from the sons of Ammon, and from the Philistines?
The Sidonians also, and the Amalekites, and the Maonites, oppressed you. And ye cried to me, and I saved you out of their hand.
Yet ye have forsaken me, and served other gods. Therefore I will save you no more.
Go and cry to the gods which ye have chosen. Let them save you in the time of your distress.
And the sons of Israel said to Jehovah, We have sinned. Do thou to us whatever seems good to thee, only deliver us, we pray thee, this day.
And they put away the foreign gods from among them, and served Jehovah. And his soul was grieved for the misery of Israel.
Then the sons of Ammon were gathered together, and encamped in Gilead. And the sons of Israel assembled themselves together, and encamped in Mizpah.
And the people, the rulers of Gilead, said one to another, What man is he who will begin to fight against the sons of Ammon? He shall be head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.

Now Jephthah the Gileadite was a mighty man of valor, and he was the son of a harlot, and Gilead begot Jephthah.
And Gilead's wife bore sons to him. And when his wife's sons grew up, they drove out Jephthah, and said to him, Thou shall not inherit in our father's house, for thou are the son of another woman.
Then Jephthah fled from his brothers, and dwelt in the land of Tob. And vain fellows were gathered to Jephthah, and they went out with him.
And it came to pass after a while, that the sons of Ammon made war against Israel.
And it was so, that, when the sons of Ammon made war against Israel, the elders of Gilead went to fetch Jephthah out of the land of Tob.
And they said to Jephthah, Come and be our chief, that we may fight with the sons of Ammon.
And Jephthah said to the elders of Gilead, Did ye not hate me, and drive me out of my father's house? And why have ye come to me now when ye are in distress?
And the elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, For that reason we turned again to thee now, that thou may go with us, and fight with the sons of Ammon. And thou shall be our head over all the inhabitants of Gilead.
And Jephthah said to the elders of Gilead, If ye bring me home again to fight with the sons of Ammon, and Jehovah delivers them before me, shall I be your head?
And the elders of Gilead said to Jephthah, Jehovah shall be witness between us. Surely according to thy word so will we do.
Then Jephthah went with the elders of Gilead, and the people made him head and chief over them. And Jephthah spoke all his words before Jehovah in Mizpah.
And Jephthah sent messengers to the king of the sons of Ammon, saying, What have thou to do with me, that thou have come to me to fight against my land?
And the king of the sons of Ammon answered to the messengers of Jephthah, Because Israel took away my land when he came up out of Egypt, from the Arnon even to the Jabbok, and to the Jordan. Now therefore restore those lands again peaceably.
And Jephthah sent messengers again to the king of the sons of Ammon.
Israel did not take away the land of Moab, nor the land of the sons of Ammon,
but when they came up from Egypt, and Israel went through the wilderness to the Red Sea, and came to Kadesh,
then Israel sent messengers to the king of Edom, saying, Let me, I pray thee, pass through thy land, but the king of Edom did not hearken. And in like manner he sent to the king of Moab, but he would not. And Israel abode in Kadesh.
Then they went through the wilderness, and went around the land of Edom, and the land of Moab, and came by the east side of the land of Moab. And they encamped on the other side of the Arnon, but they did not come within the border of Moab, for the Arnon was the border of Moab.
And Israel sent messengers to Sihon king of the Amorites, the king of Heshbon. And Israel said to him, Let us pass, we pray thee, through thy land to my place.
But Sihon did not trust Israel to pass through his border, but Sihon gathered all his people together, and encamped in Jahaz, and fought against Israel.
And Jehovah, the God of Israel, delivered Sihon and all his people into the hand of Israel, and they smote them. So Israel possessed all the land of the Amorites, the inhabitants of that country.
And they possessed all the border of the Amorites, from the Arnon even to the Jabbok, and from the wilderness even to the Jordan.
So now Jehovah, the God of Israel, has dispossessed the Amorites from before his people Israel, and should thou possess them?
Will thou not possess that which Chemosh thy god gives thee to possess? So whomever Jehovah our God has dispossessed from before us, them will we possess.
And now are thou anything better than Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab? Did he ever strive against Israel, or did he ever fight against them?
While Israel dwelt in Heshbon and its towns, and in Aroer and its towns, and in all the cities that are along by the side of the Arnon, three hundred years, why did ye not recover them within that time?
I therefore have not sinned against thee, but thou do me wrong to war against me. Jehovah, the Judge, be judge this day between the sons of Israel and the sons of Ammon.
However the king of the sons of Ammon did not hearken to the words of Jephthah which he sent him.
Then the Spirit of Jehovah came upon Jephthah, and he passed over Gilead and Manasseh, and passed over Mizpeh of Gilead, and from Mizpeh of Gilead he passed over to the sons of Ammon.
And Jephthah vowed a vow to Jehovah, and said, If thou will indeed deliver the sons of Ammon into my hand,
then it shall be, that whatever comes forth from the doors of my house to meet me, when I return in peace from the sons of Ammon, it shall be Jehovah's, and I will offer it up for a burnt offering.
So Jephthah passed over to the sons of Ammon to fight against them, and Jehovah delivered them into his hand.
And he smote them from Aroer until thou come to Minnith, even twenty cities, and to Abelcheramim, with a very great slaughter. So the sons of Ammon were subdued before the sons of Israel.
And Jephthah came to Mizpah to his house, and, behold, his daughter came out to meet him with timbrels and with dances. And she was his only child. Besides her he had neither son nor daughter.
And it came to pass, when he saw her, that he tore his clothes, and said, Alas, my daughter! Thou have brought me very low, and thou are one of those who trouble me, for I have opened my mouth to Jehovah, and I cannot go back.
And she said to him, My father, thou have opened thy mouth to Jehovah. Do to me according to that which has proceeded out of thy mouth, inasmuch as Jehovah has taken vengeance for thee on thine enemies, even on the sons of Ammon.
Let me alone two months, that I may depart and go down upon the mountains, and bewail my virginity, I and my companions.
And he said, Go. And he sent her away for two months. And she departed, she and her companions, and bewailed her virginity upon the mountains.
And it came to pass at the end of two months, that she returned to her father, who did with her according to his vow which he had vowed, and she knew no man. And it was a custom in Israel,
that the daughters of Israel went yearly to celebrate the daughter of Jephthah the Gileadite four days in a year.

And the men of Ephraim were gathered together, and passed northward. And they said to Jephthah, Why did thou pass over to fight against the sons of Ammon, and did not call us to go with thee? We will burn thy house upon thee with fire.
And Jephthah said to them, I and my people were at great strife with the sons of Ammon, and when I called you, ye did not save me out of their hand.
And when I saw that ye did not save me, I put my life in my hand, and passed opposite the sons of Ammon, and Jehovah delivered them into my hand. Why then have ye come up to me this day, to fight against me?
Then Jephthah gathered together all the men of Gilead, and fought with Ephraim. And the men of Gilead smote Ephraim, because they said, Ye are fugitives of Ephraim, ye Gileadites, in the midst of Ephraim, and in the midst of Manasseh.
And the Gileadites took the fords of the Jordan against the Ephraimites. And it was so, that, when any of the fugitives of Ephraim said, Let me go over, the men of Gilead said to him, Are thou an Ephraimite? If he said, No,
then they said to him, Say now Shibboleth, and he said Sibboleth, for he could not frame to pronounce it right, then they laid hold on him, and killed him at the fords of the Jordan. And there fell at that time of Ephraim forty-two thousand.
And Jephthah judged Israel six years. Then Jephthah the Gileadite died, and was buried in one of the cities of Gilead.
And after him Ibzan of Bethlehem judged Israel.
And he had thirty sons. And he sent abroad thirty daughters, and thirty daughters he brought in from abroad for his sons. And he judged Israel seven years.
And Ibzan died, and was buried at Bethlehem.
And after him Elon the Zebulunite judged Israel, and he judged Israel ten years.
And Elon the Zebulunite died, and was buried in Aijalon in the land of Zebulun.
And after him Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite judged Israel.
And he had forty sons and thirty sons' sons who rode on seventy donkey colts, and he judged Israel eight years.
And Abdon the son of Hillel the Pirathonite died, and was buried in Pirathon in the land of Ephraim, in the hill-country of the Amalekites.

And the sons of Israel again did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and Jehovah delivered them into the hand of the Philistines forty years.
And there was a certain man of Zorah, of the family of the Danites, whose name was Manoah, and his wife was barren, and did not bear.
And the agent of Jehovah appeared to the woman, and said to her, Behold now, thou are barren, and do not bear, but thou shall conceive, and bear a son.
Now therefore beware, I pray thee, and drink no wine nor strong drink, and do not eat any unclean thing,
for, lo, thou shall conceive, and bear a son. And no razor shall come upon his head, for the child shall be a Nazirite to God from the womb. And he shall begin to save Israel out of the hand of the Philistines.
Then the woman came and told her husband, saying, A man of God came to me, and his countenance was like the countenance of the agent of God, very awesome. And I did not ask him from where he was, neither did he tell me his name,
but he said to me, Behold, thou shall conceive, and bear a son. And now drink no wine nor strong drink, and do not eat any unclean thing, for the child shall be a Nazirite to God from the womb to the day of his death.
Then Manoah entreated Jehovah, and said, Oh, Lord, I pray thee, let the man of God whom thou sent come again to us, and teach us what we shall do to the child that shall be born.
And God hearkened to the voice of Manoah, and the agent of God came again to the woman as she sat in the field, but Manoah her husband was not with her.
And the woman made haste, and ran, and told her husband, and said to him, Behold, the man has appeared to me, who came to me the other day.
And Manoah arose, and went after his wife, and came to the man, and said to him, Are thou the man who spoke to the woman? And he said, I am.
And Manoah said, Now let thy words come to pass. What shall be the ordering of the child, and what shall we do to him?
And the agent of Jehovah said to Manoah, Of all that I said to the woman let her beware.
She may not eat of anything that comes of the vine, neither let her drink wine or strong drink, nor eat any unclean thing. All that I commanded her let her observe.
And Manoah said to the agent of Jehovah, I pray thee, let us detain thee, that we may make ready a kid for thee.
And the agent of Jehovah said to Manoah, Though thou detain me, I will not eat of thy bread, and if thou will make ready a burnt offering, thou must offer it to Jehovah. For Manoah did not know that he was the agent of Jehovah.
And Manoah said to the agent of Jehovah, What is thy name, that, when thy words come to pass, we may do thee honor?
And the agent of Jehovah said to him, Why do thou ask after my name, seeing it is wonderful?
So Manoah took the kid with the meal offering, and offered it upon the rock to Jehovah. And the agent did wondrously, and Manoah and his wife looked on,
for it came to pass, when the flame went up toward heaven from off the altar, that the agent of Jehovah ascended in the flame of the altar. And Manoah and his wife looked on, and they fell on their faces to the ground.
But the agent of Jehovah appeared no more to Manoah or to his wife. Then Manoah knew that he was the agent of Jehovah.
And Manoah said to his wife, We shall surely die, because we have seen God.
But his wife said to him, If Jehovah were pleased to kill us, he would not have received a burnt offering and a meal offering at our hand, neither would he have shown us all these things, nor would at this time have told such things as these.
And the woman bore a son, and called his name Samson. And the child grew, and Jehovah blessed him.
And the Spirit of Jehovah began to move him in Mahaneh-dan, between Zorah and Eshtaol.

And Samson went down to Timnah, and saw a woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philistines.
And he came up, and told his father and his mother, and said, I have seen a woman in Timnah of the daughters of the Philistines. Now therefore get her for me to wife.
Then his father and his mother said to him, Is there never a woman among the daughters of thy brothers, or among all my people, that thou go to take a wife of the uncircumcised Philistines? And Samson said to his father, Get her for me, for she pleases me well.
But his father and his mother knew not that it was of Jehovah, for he sought an occasion against the Philistines. Now at that time the Philistines had rule over Israel.
Then Samson went down, and his father and his mother, to Timnah, and came to the vineyards of Timnah. And, behold, a young lion roared against him.
And the Spirit of Jehovah came mightily upon him, and he tore him apart as he would have torn a kid, and he had nothing in his hand. But he did not tell his father or his mother what he had done.
And he went down, and talked with the woman, and she pleased Samson well.
And after a while he returned to take her. And he turned aside to see the carcass of the lion, and, behold, there was a swarm of bees in the body of the lion, and honey.
And he took it into his hands, and went on, eating as he went. And he came to his father and mother, and gave to them, and they ate, but he did not tell them that he had taken the honey out of the body of the lion.
And his father went down to the woman, and Samson made a feast there, for so the young men used to do.
And it came to pass, when they saw him, that they brought thirty companions to be with him.
And Samson said to them, Let me now put forth a riddle to you. If ye can declare it to me within the seven days of the feast, and find it out, then I will give you thirty linen garments and thirty changes of raiment,
but if ye cannot declare it to me, then ye shall give me thirty linen garments and thirty changes of raiment. And they said to him, Put forth thy riddle, that we may hear it.
And he said to them, Out of the eater came forth food, and out of the strong came forth sweetness. And they could not in three days declare the riddle.
And it came to pass on the seventh day, that they said to Samson's wife, Entice thy husband, that he may declare to us the riddle, lest we burn thee and thy father's house with fire. Have ye called us to impoverish us? Is it not so?
And Samson's wife wept before him, and said, Thou do but hate me, and not love me. Thou have put forth a riddle to the sons of my people, and have not told it to me. And he said to her, Behold, I have not told it to my father nor my mother, and shall I tell thee?
And she wept before him the seven days, while their feast lasted. And it came to pass on the seventh day, that he told her because she pressed him greatly. And she told the riddle to the sons of her people.
And the men of the city said to him on the seventh day before the sun went down, What is sweeter than honey? and what is stronger than a lion? And he said to them, If ye had not plowed with my heifer, ye would not have found out my riddle.
And the Spirit of Jehovah came mightily upon him, and he went down to Ashkelon, and smote thirty men of them, and took their spoil, and gave the changes of raiment to those who declared the riddle. And his anger was kindled, and he went up to his father's house.
But Samson's wife was given to his companion, whom he had used as his friend.

But it came to pass after a while, in the time of wheat harvest, that Samson visited his wife with a kid. And he said, I will go in to my wife into the chamber, but her father would not allow him to go in.
And her father said, I truly thought that thou had utterly hated her, therefore I gave her to thy companion. Is not her younger sister fairer than she? Take her, I pray thee, instead of her.
And Samson said to them, This time I shall be blameless in regard of the Philistines when I do them a mischief.
And Samson went and caught three hundred foxes, and took firebrands, and turned tail to tail, and put a firebrand in the midst between every two tails.
And when he had set the brands on fire, he let them go into the standing grain of the Philistines, and burnt up both the shocks and the standing grain, and also the oliveyards.
Then the Philistines said, Who has done this? And they said, Samson, the son-in-law of the Timnite, because he has taken his wife, and given her to his companion. And the Philistines came up, and burnt her and her father with fire.
And Samson said to them, If ye do after this manner, surely I will be avenged of you, and after that I will cease.
And he smote them hip and thigh with a great slaughter. And he went down and dwelt in the cleft of the rock of Etam.
Then the Philistines went up, and encamped in Judah, and spread themselves in Lehi.
And the men of Judah said, Why have ye come up against us? And they said, We come up to bind Samson, to do to him as he has done to us.
Then three thousand men of Judah went down to the cleft of the rock of Etam, and said to Samson, Know thou not that the Philistines are rulers over us? What then is this that thou have done to us? And he said to them, As they did to me, so have I done to them.
And they said to him, We have come down to bind thee, that we may deliver thee into the hand of the Philistines. And Samson said to them, Swear to me, that ye will not fall upon me yourselves.
And they spoke to him, saying, No, but we will bind thee fast, and deliver thee into their hand, but truly we will not kill thee. And they bound him with two new ropes, and brought him up from the rock.
When he came to Lehi, the Philistines shouted as they met him. And the Spirit of Jehovah came mightily upon him, and the ropes that were upon his arms became as flax that was burnt with fire, and his bands dropped from off his hands.
And he found a fresh jawbone of a donkey, and put forth his hand, and took it, and smote a thousand men with it.
And Samson said, With the jawbone of a donkey, heaps upon heaps, with the jawbone of a donkey I have smitten a thousand men.
And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking, that he cast away the jawbone out of his hand. And that place was called Ramath-lehi.
And he was very thirsty, and called on Jehovah, and said, Thou have given this great deliverance by the hand of thy servant, and now shall I die for thirst, and fall into the hand of the uncircumcised?
But God split the hollow place that is in Lehi, and water came out there. And when he had drunk his spirit came again, and he revived. Therefore the name of it was called En-hakkore, which is in Lehi to this day.
And he judged Israel in the days of the Philistines twenty years.

And Samson went to Gaza, and saw a harlot there, and went in to her.
And it was told the Gazites, saying, Samson has come here. And they encompassed him in, and laid wait for him all night in the gate of the city, and were quiet all the night, saying, Not till morning light, then we will kill him.
And Samson lay till midnight, and arose at midnight, and laid hold of the doors of the gate of the city, and the two posts, and plucked them up, bar and all, and put them upon his shoulders, and carried them up to the top of the mountain that is before Hebron.
And it came to pass afterward, that he loved a woman in the valley of Sorek, whose name was Delilah.
And the lords of the Philistines came up to her, and said to her, Entice him, and see in what his great strength lies, and by what means we may prevail against him, that we may bind him to afflict him. And we will give thee every one of us eleven hundred pieces of silver.
And Delilah said to Samson, Tell me, I pray thee, in what thy great strength lies, and with what thou might be bound to afflict thee.
And Samson said to her, If they bind me with seven green withes that were never dried, then I shall become weak, and be as another man.
Then the lords of the Philistines brought up to her seven green withes which had not been dried, and she bound him with them.
Now she had an ambush abiding in the inner chamber. And she said to him, The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And he broke the withes, as a string of tow is broken when it touches the fire. So his strength was not known.
And Delilah said to Samson, Behold, thou have mocked me, and told me lies. Now tell me, I pray thee, with what thou might be bound.
And he said to her, If they only bind me with new ropes with which no work has been done, then I shall become weak, and be as another man.
So Delilah took new ropes, and bound him with it, and said to him, The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And the ambushment was abiding in the inner chamber. And he broke them off his arms like a thread.
And Delilah said to Samson, Until now thou have mocked me, and told me lies. Tell me with what thou might be bound. And he said to her, If thou weave the seven locks of my head with the web.
And she fastened it with the pin, and said to him, The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out of his sleep, and plucked away the pin of the beam, and the web.
And she said to him, How can thou say, I love thee, when thy heart is not with me? Thou have mocked me these three times, and have not told me with what thy great strength lies.
And it came to pass, when she pressed him daily with her words, and urged him, that his soul was vexed to death.
And he told her all his heart, and said to her, There has not come a razor upon my head, for I have been a Nazirite to God from my mother's womb. If I be shaven, then my strength will go from me, and I shall become weak, and be like any other man.
And when Delilah saw that he had told her all his heart, she sent and called for the lords of the Philistines, saying, Come up this once, for he has told me all his heart. Then the lords of the Philistines came up to her, and brought the money in their hand.
And she made him sleep upon her knees, and she called for a man, and shaved off the seven locks of his head. And she began to afflict him, and his strength went from him.
And she said, The Philistines are upon thee, Samson. And he awoke out of his sleep, and said, I will go out as at other times, and shake myself free, but he knew not that Jehovah was departed from him.
And the Philistines laid hold on him, and put out his eyes. And they brought him down to Gaza, and bound him with fetters of brass, and he did grinding in the prison-house.
However the hair of his head began to grow again after he was shaven.
And the lords of the Philistines gathered together to offer a great sacrifice to Dagon their god, and to rejoice, for they said, Our god has delivered Samson our enemy into our hand.
And when the people saw him, they praised their god, for they said, Our god has delivered into our hand our enemy, and the destroyer of our country who has slain many of us.
And it came to pass, when their hearts were merry, that they said, Call for Samson, that he may make sport to us. And they called for Samson out of the prison-house, and he made sport before them. And they set him between the pillars.
And Samson said to the lad who held him by the hand, Allow me that I may feel the pillars upon which the house rests, that I may lean upon them.
Now the house was full of men and women, and all the lords of the Philistines were there. And there were upon the roof about three thousand men and women, who beheld while Samson made sport.
And Samson called to Jehovah, and said, O lord Jehovah, remember me, I pray thee, and strengthen me, I pray thee, only this once, O God, that I may be at once avenged of the Philistines for my two eyes.
And Samson took hold of the two middle pillars upon which the house rested, and leaned upon them, the one with his right hand, and the other with his left.
And Samson said, Let me die with the Philistines. And he bowed himself with all his might, and the house fell upon the lords, and upon all the people that were in it. So the dead that he killed at his death were more than those that he killed in his life.
Then his brothers and all the house of his father came down, and took him, and brought him up, and buried him between Zorah and Eshtaol in the burying-place of Manoah his father. And he judged Israel twenty years.

And there was a man of the hill-country of Ephraim, whose name was Micah.
And he said to his mother, The eleven hundred pieces of silver that were taken from thee, about which thou uttered a curse, and also spoke it in my ears, behold, the silver is with me. I took it. And his mother said, Blessed be my son from Jehovah.
And he restored the eleven hundred pieces of silver to his mother. And his mother said, I verily dedicate the silver to Jehovah from my hand for my son to make a graven image and a molten image. Now therefore I will restore it to thee.
And when he restored the money to his mother, his mother took two hundred pieces of silver, and gave them to the founder, who made of it a graven image and a molten image. And it was in the house of Micah.
And the man Micah had a house of gods, and he made an ephod, and teraphim, and consecrated one of his sons, who became his priest.
In those days there was no king in Israel. Every man did that which was right in his own eyes.
And there was a young man out of Bethlehem-judah, of the family of Judah, who was a Levite, and he sojourned there.
And the man departed out of the city, out of Bethlehem-judah, to sojourn where he could find a place. And he came to the hill-country of Ephraim to the house of Micah, as he journeyed.
And Micah said to him, From where come thou? And he said to him, I am a Levite of Bethlehem-judah, and I go to sojourn where I may find a place.
And Micah said to him, Dwell with me, and be to me a father and a priest, and I will give thee ten pieces of silver by the year, and a suit of apparel, and thy food. So the Levite went in.
And the Levite was content to dwell with the man, and the young man was to him as one of his sons.
And Micah consecrated the Levite, and the young man became his priest, and was in the house of Micah.
Then Micah said, Now I know that Jehovah will do me good, seeing I have a Levite for my priest.

In those days there was no king in Israel. And in those days the tribe of the Danites sought for them an inheritance to dwell in, for to that day their inheritance had not fallen to them among the tribes of Israel.
And the sons of Dan sent of their family five men from their whole number, men of valor, from Zorah, and from Eshtaol, to spy out the land, and to search it. And they said to them, Go, search the land. And they came to the hill-country of Ephraim to the house of Micah, and lodged there.
When they were by the house of Micah, they recognized the voice of the young man the Levite. And they turned aside there, and said to him, Who brought thee here? And what are thou doing in this place? And what have thou here?
And he said to them, Thus and thus has Micah dealt with me, and he has hired me, and I have become his priest.
And they said to him, Ask counsel, we pray thee, of God, that we may know whether our way which we go shall be prosperous.
And the priest said to them, Go in peace. Your way is before Jehovah in which ye go.
Then the five men departed, and came to Laish, and saw the people that were in it, how they dwelt in security, according to the manner of the Sidonians, quiet and secure, for there was none in the land possessing authority, that might put them to shame in anything. And they were far from the Sidonians, and had no dealings with any man.
And they came to their brothers to Zorah and Eshtaol. And their brothers said to them, What say ye?
And they said, Arise, and let us go up against them, for we have seen the land, and, behold, it is very good, and are ye idle? Be not slothful to go and to enter in to possess the land.
When ye go, ye shall come to a people secure. And the land is large, for God has given it into your hand, a place where there is no want of anything that is on the earth.
And there set forth from there of the family of the Danites, out of Zorah and out of Eshtaol, six hundred men girded with weapons of war.
And they went up, and encamped in Kiriath-jearim, in Judah. Therefore they called that place Mahaneh-dan, to this day. Behold, it is behind Kiriath-jearim.
And they passed from there to the hill-country of Ephraim, and came to the house of Micah.
Then the five men who went to spy out the country of Laish, answered and said to their brothers, Do ye know that there is in these houses an ephod, and teraphim, and a graven image, and a molten image? Now therefore consider what ye have to do.
And they turned aside there, and came to the house of the young man the Levite, even to the house of Micah, and asked him of his welfare.
And the six hundred men girded with their weapons of war, who were of the sons of Dan, stood by the entrance of the gate.
And the five men who went to spy out the land went up, and came in there, and took the graven image, and the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image. And the priest stood by the entrance of the gate with the six hundred men girded with weapons of war.
And when these went into Micah's house, and fetched the graven image, the ephod, and the teraphim, and the molten image, the priest said to them, What do ye?
And they said to him, Hold thy peace, lay thy hand upon thy mouth, and go with us, and be to us a father and a priest. Is it better for thee to be priest to the house of one man, or to be priest to a tribe and a family in Israel?
And the priest's heart was glad, and he took the ephod, and the teraphim, and the graven image, and went in the midst of the people.
So they turned and departed, and put the little ones and the cattle and the goods before them.
When they were a good way from the house of Micah, the men who were in the houses near to Micah's house were gathered together, and overtook the sons of Dan.
And they cried out to the sons of Dan. And they turned their faces, and said to Micah, What troubles thee that thou come with such a company?
And he said, ye have taken away my gods which I made, and the priest, and have gone away, and what have I more? And how do ye then say to me, What troubles thee?
And the sons of Dan said to him, Let not thy voice be heard among us, lest angry fellows fall upon you, and thou lose thy life, with the lives of thy household.
And the sons of Dan went their way. And when Micah saw that they were too strong for him, he turned and went back to his house.
And they took that which Micah had made, and the priest whom he had, and came to Laish, to a people quiet and secure, and smote them with the edge of the sword, and they burnt the city with fire.
And there was no deliverer because it was far from Sidon, and they had no dealings with any man, and it was in the valley that lies by Beth-rehob. And they built the city, and dwelt in it.
And they called the name of the city Dan, after the name of Dan their father who was born to Israel. However the name of the city was Laish at first.
And the sons of Dan set up for themselves the graven image. And Jonathan, the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, he and his sons were priests to the tribe of the Danites until the day of the captivity of the land.
So they set up for them Micah's graven image which he made, all the time that the house of God was in Shiloh.

And it came to pass in those days, when there was no king in Israel, that there was a certain Levite sojourning on the farther side of the hill-country of Ephraim, who took to him a concubine out of Bethlehem-judah.
And his concubine played the harlot against him, and went away from him to her father's house to Bethlehem-judah, and was there the space of four months.
And her husband arose, and went after her, to speak kindly to her, to bring her again, having his servant with him, and a couple of donkeys. And she brought him into her father's house, and when the father of the damsel saw him, he rejoiced to meet him.
And his father-in-law, the damsel's father, retained him, and he abode with him three days. So they ate and drank, and lodged there.
And it came to pass on the fourth day, that they arose early in the morning, and he rose up to depart. And the damsel's father said to his son-in-law, Strengthen thy heart with a morsel of bread, and afterward ye shall go your way.
So they sat down, and ate and drank, both of them together. And the damsel's father said to the man, Be pleased, I pray thee, to tarry all night, and let thy heart be merry.
And the man rose up to depart, but his father-in-law urged him, and he lodged there again.
And he arose early in the morning on the fifth day to depart. And the damsel's father said, Strengthen thy heart, I pray thee, and tarry ye until the day declines. And they ate, both of them.
And when the man rose up to depart, he, and his concubine, and his servant, his father-in-law, the damsel's father, said to him, Behold, now the day draws toward evening, I pray you tarry all night. Behold, the day grows to an end, lodge here that thy heart may be merry, and tomorrow get early on your way that thou may go home.
But the man would not tarry that night, but he rose up and departed, and came opposite Jebus (the same is Jerusalem). And there were with him a couple of saddled donkeys. His concubine was also with him.
When they were by Jebus, the day was far spent, and the servant said to his master, Come, I pray thee, and let us turn aside into this city of the Jebusites, and lodge in it.
And his master said to him, We will not turn aside into the city of a foreigner that is not of the sons of Israel, but we will pass over to Gibeah.
And he said to his servant, Come and let us draw near to one of these places, and we will lodge in Gibeah, or in Ramah.
So they passed on and went their way. And the sun went down upon them near to Gibeah, which belongs to Benjamin.
And they turned aside there, to go in to lodge in Gibeah. And he went in, and sat down in the street of the city, for there was no man that took them into his house to lodge.
And, behold, there came an old man from his work out of the field at evening. Now the man was of the hill-country of Ephraim, and he sojourned in Gibeah, but the men of the place were Benjamites.
And he lifted up his eyes, and saw the wayfaring man in the street of the city. And the old man said, Where do thou go? And from where do thou come?
And he said to him, We are passing from Bethlehem-judah to the farther side of the hill-country of Ephraim. I am from there, and I went to Bethlehem-judah. And I am now going to the house of Jehovah, and there is no man that takes me into his house.
Yet there is both straw and provender for our donkeys, and there is bread and wine also for me, and for thy handmaid, and for the young man who is with thy servants. There is no want of anything.
And the old man said, Peace be to thee. However let all thy wants lie upon me, only do not lodge in the street.
So he brought him into his house, and gave the donkeys fodder. And they washed their feet, and ate and drank.
As they were making their hearts merry, behold, the men of the city, certain base fellows, beset the house round about, beating at the door. And they spoke to the master of the house, the old man, saying, Bring forth the man who came into thy house, that we may know him.
And the man, the master of the house, went out to them, and said to them, No, my brothers, I pray you, do not so wickedly, seeing that this man has come into my house. Do not this folly.
Behold, here is my daughter a virgin, and his concubine. I will bring them out now, and humble ye them, and do with them what seems good to you, but to this man do not any such folly.
But the men would not hearken to him. So the man laid hold on his concubine, and brought her forth to them. And they knew her, and abused her all the night until the morning, and when the day began to spring, they let her go.
Then the woman came in the dawning of the day, and fell down at the door of the man's house where her lord was, till it was light.
And her lord rose up in the morning, and opened the doors of the house, and went out to go his way, and, behold, the woman his concubine was fallen down at the door of the house, with her hands upon the threshold.
And he said to her, Up, and let us be going, but there was no answering. Then he took her up upon the donkey, and the man rose up, and got to his place.
And when he came into his house, he took a knife, and laid hold on his concubine, and divided her, limb by limb, into twelve pieces, and sent her throughout all the borders of Israel.
And it was so, that all who saw it said, There was no such deed done nor seen from the day that the sons of Israel came up out of the land of Egypt to this day. Consider it, take counsel, and speak.

Then all the sons of Israel went out. And the congregation was assembled as one man, from Dan even to Beersheba, with the land of Gilead, to Jehovah at Mizpah.
And the chiefs of all the people, even of all the tribes of Israel, presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God, four hundred thousand footmen who drew a sword.
(Now the sons of Benjamin heard that the sons of Israel had gone up to Mizpah.) And the sons of Israel said, Tell us, how was this wickedness brought to pass?
And the Levite, the husband of the woman who was murdered, answered and said, I came into Gibeah that belongs to Benjamin, I and my concubine, to lodge.
And the men of Gibeah rose against me, and beset the house round about me by night. They thought to have me slain, and they forced my concubine, and she is dead.
And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces, and sent her throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel, for they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel.
Behold, ye sons of Israel, all of you, give here your advice and counsel.
And all the people arose as one man, saying, We will not any of us go to his tent, neither will we any of us turn to his house.
We will go up against it by lot,
and we will take ten men of a hundred throughout all the tribes of Israel, and a hundred of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand, to fetch provision for the people, that they may do, when they come to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to all the folly that they have wrought in Israel.
So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city, knit together as one man.
And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribe of Benjamin, saying, What wickedness is this that has come to pass among you?
Now therefore deliver up the men, the base fellows, who are in Gibeah, that we may put them to death, and put away evil from Israel. But Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their brothers the sons of Israel.
And the sons of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the cities to Gibeah, to go out to battle against the sons of Israel.
And the sons of Benjamin were numbered on that day out of the cities twenty-six thousand men who drew a sword, besides the inhabitants of Gibeah, who were numbered seven hundred chosen men.
Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men left-handed. Every one could sling stones at a hair-breadth, and not miss.
And the men of Israel, besides Benjamin, were numbered four hundred thousand men who drew a sword. All these were men of war.
And the sons of Israel arose, and went up to Bethel, and asked counsel of God. And they said, Who shall go up for us first to battle against the sons of Benjamin? And Jehovah said, Judah first.
And the sons of Israel rose up in the morning, and encamped against Gibeah.
And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin. And the men of Israel set the battle in array against them at Gibeah.
And the sons of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah, and destroyed down to the ground of the Israelites on that day twenty-two thousand men.
And the people, the men of Israel, encouraged themselves, and set the battle again in array in the place where they set themselves in array the first day.
And the sons of Israel went up and wept before Jehovah until evening. And they asked of Jehovah, saying, Shall I again draw near to battle against the sons of Benjamin my brother? And Jehovah said, Go up against him.
And the sons of Israel came near against the sons of Benjamin the second day.
And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day, and destroyed down to the ground of the sons of Israel again eighteen thousand men. All these drew the sword.
Then all the sons of Israel, and all the people, went up, and came to Bethel, and wept, and sat there before Jehovah, and fasted that day until evening, and they offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before Jehovah.
And the sons of Israel asked of Jehovah (for the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days,
and Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in those days), saying, Shall I yet again go out to battle against the sons of Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? And Jehovah said, Go up, for tomorrow I will deliver him into thy hand.
And Israel set an ambushment against Gibeah round about.
And the sons of Israel went up against the sons of Benjamin on the third day, and set themselves in array against Gibeah, as at other times.
And the sons of Benjamin went out against the people, and were drawn away from the city. And they began to smite and kill of the people as at other times, in the highways, of which one goes up to Bethel, and the other to Gibeah, in the field about thirty men of Israel.
And the sons of Benjamin said, They are smitten down before us as at the first. But the sons of Israel said, Let us flee, and draw them away from the city to the highways.
And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place, and set themselves in array at Baal-tamar, and the ambushment of Israel broke forth out of their place, even out of Maareh-geba.
And there came opposite Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and the battle was severe, but they knew not that evil was close upon them.
And Jehovah smote Benjamin before Israel, and the sons of Israel destroyed of Benjamin that day twenty-five thousand and a hundred men. All these drew the sword.
So the sons of Benjamin saw that they were smitten, for the men of Israel gave place to Benjamin because they trusted to the ambushment whom they had set against Gibeah.
And the ambushment hastened, and rushed upon Gibeah. And the ambushment drew themselves along, and smote all the city with the edge of the sword.
Now the appointed sign between the men of Israel and the ambushment was, that they should make a great cloud of smoke rise up out of the city.
And the men of Israel turned in the battle, and Benjamin began to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty persons, for they said, Surely they are smitten down before us as in the first battle.
But when the cloud began to arise up out of the city in a pillar of smoke, the Benjamites looked behind them, and, behold, the whole of the city went up in smoke to heaven.
And the men of Israel turned, and the men of Benjamin were dismayed, for they saw that evil had come upon them.
Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel to the way of the wilderness. But the battle followed hard after them, and those who came out of the cities destroyed them in the midst of it.
They enclosed the Benjamites round about, and chased them, and trod them down at their resting-place, as far as opposite Gibeah toward the sunrise.
And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men. All these were men of valor.
And they turned and fled toward the wilderness to the rock of Rimmon. And they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men, and followed hard after them to Gidom, and smote of them two thousand men.
So that all who fell that day of Benjamin were twenty-five thousand men who drew the sword. All these were men of valor.
But six hundred men turned and fled toward the wilderness to the rock of Rimmon, and abode in the rock of Rimmon four months.
And the men of Israel turned again upon the sons of Benjamin, and smote them with the edge of the sword, both the entire city, and the cattle, and all that they found. Moreover they set on fire all the cities which they found.

Now the men of Israel had sworn in Mizpah, saying, There shall not any of us give his daughter to Benjamin to wife.
And the people came to Bethel, and sat there till evening before God, and lifted up their voices, and wept bitterly.
And they said, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, why has this come to pass in Israel, that there should be today one tribe lacking in Israel?
And it came to pass on the morrow, that the people rose early, and built there an altar, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings.
And the sons of Israel said, Who is there among all the tribes of Israel that did not come up in the assembly to Jehovah? For they had made a great oath concerning him who did not come up to Jehovah to Mizpah, saying, He shall surely be put to death.
And the sons of Israel regretted for Benjamin their brother, and said, There is one tribe cut off from Israel this day.
What shall we do for wives for those who remain, since we have sworn by Jehovah that we will not give them of our daughters to wives?
And they said, Which one is there of the tribes of Israel that did not come up to Jehovah to Mizpah? And, behold, there came none to the camp from Jabesh-gilead to the assembly.
For when the people were numbered, behold, there were none of the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead there.
And the congregation sent there twelve thousand men of the most valiant, and commanded them, saying, Go and smite the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead with the edge of the sword, with the women and the little ones.
Ye shall utterly destroy every male, and every woman that has lain by man.
And they found among the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead four hundred young virgins who had not known man by lying with him, and they brought them to the camp to Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan.
And the whole congregation sent and spoke to the sons of Benjamin who were in the rock of Rimmon, and proclaimed peace to them.
And Benjamin returned at that time, and they gave them the women whom they had saved alive of the women of Jabesh-gilead. And even so they were not sufficient for them.
And the people regretted for Benjamin, because Jehovah had made a breach in the tribes of Israel.
Then the elders of the congregation said, What shall we do for wives for those who remain, since the women are destroyed out of Benjamin?
And they said, There must be an inheritance for those who are escaped of Benjamin, that a tribe be not blotted out from Israel.
However we may not give them wives of our daughters, for the sons of Israel had sworn, saying, Cursed be he who gives a wife to Benjamin.
And they said, Behold, there is a feast of Jehovah from year to year in Shiloh, which is on the north of Bethel, on the east side of the highway that goes up from Bethel to Shechem, and on the south of Lebonah.
And they commanded the sons of Benjamin, saying, Go and lie in wait in the vineyards,
and watch. And, behold, if the daughters of Shiloh come out to dance in the dances, then come ye out of the vineyards, and catch for you every man his wife from the daughters of Shiloh, and go to the land of Benjamin.
And it shall be, when their fathers or their brothers come to complain to us, that we will say to them, Grant them graciously to us, because we took not for each man of them his wife in battle, neither did ye give them to them, else ye would now be guilty.
And the sons of Benjamin did so, and took for them wives, according to their number, of those who danced, whom they carried off. And they went and returned to their inheritance, and built the cities, and dwelt in them.
And the sons of Israel departed from there at that time, every man to his tribe and to his family, and they went out from there every man to his inheritance.
In those days there was no king in Israel. Every man did that which was right in his own eyes.

Ruth

And it came to pass in the days when the judges judged, that there was a famine in the land. And a certain man of Bethlehem-judah went to sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.
And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi, and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion, Ephrathites of Bethlehem-judah. And they came into the country of Moab, and continued there.
And Elimelech, Naomi's husband, died, and she was left, and her two sons.
And they took wives for them of the women of Moab. The name of the one was Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth, and they dwelt there about ten years.
And Mahlon and Chilion died, both of them, and the woman was left of her two children and of her husband.
Then she arose with her daughters-in-law that she might return from the country of Moab, for she had heard in the country of Moab how that Jehovah had visited his people in giving them bread.
And she went forth out of the place where she was, and her two daughters-in-law with her, and they went on the way to return to the land of Judah.
And Naomi said to her two daughters-in-law, Go, return each of you to her mother's house. Jehovah deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead, and with me.
Jehovah grant you that ye may find rest, each of you in the house of her husband. Then she kissed them, and they lifted up their voices, and wept.
And they said to her, No, but we will return with thee to thy people.
And Naomi said, Turn again, my daughters. Why will ye go with me? Have I yet sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?
Turn again, my daughters. Go your way, for I am too old to have a husband. If I should say, I have hope. If I should even have a husband tonight, and should also bear sons,
would ye therefore delay till they were grown? Would ye therefore stay from having husbands? No, my daughters, for it grieves me much for your sakes, for the hand of Jehovah has gone forth against me.
And they lifted up their voices, and wept again. And Orpah kissed her mother-in-law, but Ruth clung to her.
And she said, Behold, thy sister-in-law has gone back to her people, and to her god. Return thou after thy sister-in-law.
And Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave thee, and to return from following after thee, for where thou go, I will go, and where thou lodge, I will lodge. Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God.
Where thou die, I will die, and there I will be buried. Jehovah do so to me, and more also, if anything but death parts thee and me.
And when she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her, she left off speaking to her.
So those two went until they came to Bethlehem. And it came to pass, when they came to Bethlehem, that all the city was moved about them, and the women said, Is this Naomi?
And she said to them, Call me not Naomi. Call me Mara, for the Almighty has dealt very bitterly with me.
I went out full, and Jehovah has brought me home again empty. Why do ye call me Naomi, seeing Jehovah has testified against me, and the Almighty has afflicted me?
So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter-in-law, with her, who returned out of the country of Moab. And they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of barley harvest.

And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth, of the family of Elimelech, and his name was Boaz.
And Ruth the Moabitess said to Naomi, Let me now go to the field, and glean among the ears of grain after him in whose sight I shall find favor. And she said to her, Go, my daughter.
And she went, and came and gleaned in the field after the reapers. And her chance was to land on the portion of the field belonging to Boaz, who was of the family of Elimelech.
And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said to the reapers, Jehovah be with you. And they answered him, Jehovah bless thee.
Then Boaz said to his servant who was set over the reapers, Whose damsel is this?
And the servant who was set over the reapers answered and said, It is the Moabite damsel who came back with Naomi out of the country of Moab.
And she said, Let me glean, I pray you, and gather behind the reapers among the sheaves. So she came, and has continued even from the morning until now, except that she tarried a little in the house.
Then Boaz said to Ruth, Do thou not hear, my daughter? Go not to glean in another field, neither pass from here, but abide here close by my maidens.
Let thine eyes be on the field that they reap, and go thou after them. Have I not charged the young men that they shall not touch thee? And when thou are thirsty, go to the vessels, and drink of that which the young men have drawn.
Then she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and said to him, Why have I found favor in thy sight that thou should take knowledge of me, seeing I am a foreigner?
And Boaz answered and said to her, It has been fully shown me all that thou have done to thy mother-in-law since the death of thy husband, and how thou have left thy father and thy mother, and the land of thy nativity, and have come to a people that thou knew not formerly.
Jehovah recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of Jehovah, the God of Israel, under whose wings thou have come to take refuge.
Then she said, Let me find favor in thy sight, my lord, because thou have comforted me, and because thou have spoken kindly to thy handmaid, though I be not as one of thy handmaidens.
And at mealtime Boaz said to her, Come here, and eat of the bread, and dip thy morsel in the vinegar. And she sat beside the reapers, and they passed her parched grain, and she ate, and was satisfied, and left of it.
And when she arose up to glean, Boaz commanded his young men, saying, Let her glean even among the sheaves, and do not reproach her.
And also pull out some for her from the bundles, and leave it, and let her glean, and do not rebuke her.
So she gleaned in the field until evening. And she beat out that which she had gleaned, and it was about an ephah of barley.
And she took it up, and went into the city, and her mother-in-law saw what she had gleaned. And she brought forth and gave to her that which she had left after she was satisfied.
And her mother-in-law said to her, Where have thou gleaned today? And where have thou worked? Blessed be he who took knowledge of thee. And she showed her mother-in-law with whom she had worked, and said, The man's name with whom I worked today is Boaz.
And Naomi said to her daughter-in-law, Blessed be he of Jehovah who has not left off his kindness to the living and to the dead. And Naomi said to her, The man is near of kin to us, one of our near kinsmen.
And Ruth the Moabitess said, Yes, he said to me, Thou shall keep close by my young men until they have ended all my harvest.
And Naomi said to Ruth her daughter-in-law, It is good, my daughter, that thou go out with his maidens, and that they not meet thee in any other field.
So she kept close by the maidens of Boaz, to glean to the end of barley harvest and of wheat harvest. And she dwelt with her mother-in-law.

And Naomi her mother-in-law said to her, My daughter, shall I not seek rest for thee, that it may be well with thee?
And now is not Boaz our kinsman, with whose maidens thou were? Behold, he winnows barley tonight in the threshing-floor.
Wash thyself therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy raiment upon thee, and get thee down to the threshing-floor. But do not make thyself known to the man until he shall have done eating and drinking.
And it shall be, when he lies down, that thou shall notice the place where he shall lie. And thou shall go in, and uncover his feet, and lie thee down. And he will tell thee what thou shall do.
And she said to her, All that thou say I will do.
And she went down to the threshing-floor, and did according to all that her mother-in-law bade her.
And when Boaz had eaten and drunk, and his heart was merry, he went to lie down at the end of the heap of grain. And she came softly, and uncovered his feet, and laid down.
And it came to pass at midnight, that the man was startled, and turned himself, and, behold, a woman lay at his feet.
And he said, Who are thou? And she answered, I am Ruth thy handmaid. Spread therefore thy skirt over thy handmaid, for thou are a near kinsman.
And he said, Blessed be thou of Jehovah, my daughter. Thou have shown more kindness in the latter end than at the beginning, inasmuch as thou did not follow young men, whether poor or rich.
And now, my daughter, fear not. I will do to thee all that thou say, for all the city of my people know that thou are a worthy woman.
And now it is true that I am a near kinsman. However there is a kinsman nearer than I.
Remain this night, and it shall be in the morning that if he will perform to thee the part of a kinsman, well; let him do the kinsman's part. But if he will not do the part of a kinsman to thee, then I will do the part of a kinsman to thee, as Jehovah lives. Lie down until the morning.
And she lay at his feet until the morning. And she rose up before one could discern another. For he said, Let it not be known that the woman came to the threshing-floor.
And he said, Bring the mantle that is upon thee, and hold it. And she held it, and he measured six measures of barley, and laid it on her, and he went into the city.
And when she came to her mother-in-law, she said, Who are thou, my daughter? And she told her all that the man had done to her.
And she said, He gave me these six measures of barley, for he said, Go not empty to thy mother-in-law.
Then she said, Sit still, my daughter, until thou know how the matter will fall, for the man will not rest until he has finished the thing this day.

Now Boaz went up to the gate, and sat down there. And, behold, the near kinsman of whom Boaz spoke came by, to whom he said, Such man, stay, turn aside. Sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat down.
And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye down here. And they sat down.
And he said to the near kinsman, Naomi, who has come again out of the country of Moab, sells the parcel of land, which was our brother Elimelech's.
And I thought to disclose it to thee, saying, Buy it before those who sit here, and before the elders of my people. If thou will redeem it, redeem it, but if thou will not redeem it, then tell me that I may know, for there is none to redeem it besides thee, and I am after thee. And he said, I will redeem it.
Then Boaz said, That day thou buy the field of the hand of Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of the dead, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance.
And the near kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself lest I mar my own inheritance. Take thou my right of redemption on thee, for I cannot redeem it.
A man drew off his shoe, and gave it to his neighbor. And this was the manner of attestation in Israel.
So the near kinsman said to Boaz, Buy it for thyself. And he drew off his shoe.
And Boaz said to the elders, and to all the people, Ye are witnesses this day, that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's, from the hand of Naomi.
Moreover Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, I have purchased to be my wife, to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance, that the name of the dead not be cut off from among his brothers, and from the gate of his place. Ye are witnesses this day.
And all the people who were in the gate, and the elders, said, We are witnesses. Jehovah make the woman that has come into thy house like Rachel and like Leah, which two built the house of Israel, and do thou worthily in Ephrathah, and be famous in Bethlehem.
And let thy house be like the house of Perez whom Tamar bore to Judah, of the seed which Jehovah shall give thee by this young woman.
So Boaz took Ruth, and she became his wife. And he went in to her, and Jehovah gave her conception, and she bore a son.
And the women said to Naomi, Blessed be Jehovah, who has not left thee this day without a near kinsman. And let his name be famous in Israel.
And he shall be to thee a restorer of life, and a nourisher of thine old age, for thy daughter-in-law, who loves thee, who is better to thee than seven sons, has borne him.
And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom, and became nurse to it.
And the women, her neighbors, gave it a name, saying, There is a son born to Naomi. And they called his name Obed. He is the father of Jesse, the father of David.
Perez begot Hezron,
and Hezron begot Ram, and Ram begot Amminadab,
and Amminadab begot Nahshon, and Nahshon begot Salmon,
and Salmon begot Boaz, and Boaz begot Obed,
and Obed begot Jesse, and Jesse begot David.

I Samuel

Now there was a certain man of Ramathaim-zophim of the hill-country of Ephraim. And his name was Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph, an Ephraimite.
the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah. And Peninnah had children, but Hannah had no children.
And this man went up out of his city from year to year to worship and to sacrifice to Jehovah of hosts in Shiloh. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, priests to Jehovah, were there.
And when the day came that Elkanah sacrificed, he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters, portions,
but to Hannah he gave a double portion, for he loved Hannah, but Jehovah had shut up her womb.
And her rival provoked her greatly, to make her fret, because Jehovah had shut up her womb.
And as he did so year by year when she went up to the house of Jehovah, so she provoked her. Therefore she wept, and did not eat.
And Elkanah her husband said to her, Hannah, why do thou weep? And why do thou not eat? And why is thy heart grieved? Am not I better to thee than ten sons?
So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had drunk. Now Eli the priest was sitting upon his seat by the door-post of the temple of Jehovah.
And she was in bitterness of soul, and prayed to Jehovah, and wept much.
And she vowed a vow, and said, O Jehovah of hosts, if thou will indeed look on the affliction of thy handmaid, and remember me, and not forget thy handmaid, but will give to thy handmaid a man-child, then I will give him to Jehovah all the days of his life, and there shall no razor come upon his head.
And it came to pass, as she continued praying before Jehovah, that Eli noticed her mouth.
Now Hannah, she spoke in her heart; only her lips moved, but her voice was not heard. Therefore Eli thought she was drunk.
And Eli said to her, How long will thou be drunken? Put away thy wine from thee.
And Hannah answered and said, No, my lord, I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit. I have drunk neither wine nor strong drink, but I poured out my soul before Jehovah.
Count not thy handmaid for an iniquitous woman, for out of the abundance of my complaint and my provocation have I spoken until now.
Then Eli answered and said, Go in peace, and the God of Israel grant thy petition that thou have asked of him.
And she said, Let thy handmaid find favor in thy sight. So the woman went her way, and ate, and her countenance was no more sad.
And they rose up in the morning early, and worshiped before Jehovah, and returned, and came to their house to Ramah. And Elkanah knew Hannah his wife, and Jehovah remembered her.
And it came to pass, when the time came about, that Hannah conceived, and bore a son. And she called his name Samuel, saying, Because I have asked him of Jehovah.
And the man Elkanah, and all his house, went up to offer to Jehovah the yearly sacrifice, and his vow.
But Hannah did not go up, for she said to her husband, Not until the child be weaned, and then I will bring him, that he may appear before Jehovah, and abide there forever.
And Elkanah her husband said to her, Do what seems good to thee. Remain until thou have weaned him, only Jehovah establish his word. So the woman remained and gave her son suck, until she weaned him.
And when she had weaned him, she took him up with her, with three bullocks, and one ephah of meal, and a bottle of wine, and brought him to the house of Jehovah in Shiloh, and the child was young.
And they killed the bullock, and brought the child to Eli.
And she said, Oh, my lord, as thy soul lives, my lord, I am the woman who stood by thee here, praying to Jehovah.
I prayed for this child, and Jehovah has given me my petition which I asked of him.
Therefore also I have granted him to Jehovah; as long as he lives he is granted to Jehovah. And he worshiped Jehovah there.

And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart exults in Jehovah. My horn is exalted in Jehovah. My mouth is enlarged over my enemies because I rejoice in thy salvation.
There is none holy as Jehovah, for there is none besides thee, neither is there any rock like our God.
Talk no more so very proudly. Let not arrogancy come out of your mouth, for Jehovah is a God of knowledge, and by him actions are weighed.
The bows of the mighty men are broken, and those who stumbled are girded with strength.
Those who were full have hired out themselves for bread, and those who were hungry have ceased to hunger. Yea, the barren has borne seven, and she who has many sons languishes.
Jehovah kills, and makes alive. He brings down to Sheol, and brings up.
Jehovah makes poor, and makes rich. He brings low, he also lifts up.
He raises up the poor out of the dust, he lifts up the needy from the dunghill, to make them sit with rulers, and inherit the throne of glory. For the pillars of the earth are Jehovah's, and he has set the world upon them.
He will keep the feet of his holy ones, but the wicked shall be put to silence in darkness, for by strength no man shall prevail.
Those who strive with Jehovah shall be broken to pieces. He will thunder against them in heaven. Jehovah will judge the ends of the earth, and he will give strength to his king, and exalt the horn of his anointed.
And Elkanah went to Ramah to his house, and the child ministered to Jehovah before Eli the priest.
Now the sons of Eli were base men; they knew not Jehovah.
And the custom of the priests with the people was, that, when any man offered sacrifice, the priest's servant came, while the flesh was boiling, with a flesh-hook of three teeth in his hand,
and he struck it into the pan, or kettle, or caldron, or pot. All that the flesh-hook brought up the priest took with it. So they did in Shiloh to all the Israelites who came there.
And before they burned the fat, the priest's servant came, and said to the man who sacrificed, Give flesh to roast for the priest, for he will not have boiled flesh from thee, but raw.
And if the man said to him, They will surely burn the fat first, and then take as much as thy soul desires, then he would say, No, but thou shall give it to me now, and if not, I will take it by force.
And the sin of the young men was very great before Jehovah, for the men despised the offering of Jehovah.
But Samuel ministered before Jehovah, being a child, girded with a linen ephod.
Moreover his mother made him a little robe, and brought it to him from year to year when she came up with her husband to offer the yearly sacrifice.
And Eli blessed Elkanah and his wife, and said, Jehovah give thee seed by this woman for the petition which was asked of Jehovah. And they went to their own home.
And Jehovah visited Hannah, and she conceived, and bore three sons and two daughters. And the child Samuel grew before Jehovah.
Now Eli was very old. And he heard all that his sons did to all Israel, and how that they lay with the women who assembled at the door of the tent of meeting.
And he said to them, Why do ye such things? For I hear of your evil dealings from all this people.
No, my sons, for it is no good report that I hear. Ye make Jehovah's people to transgress.
If one man sins against another, God shall judge him, but if a man sins against Jehovah, who shall entreat for him? Notwithstanding, they did not hearken to the voice of their father, because Jehovah intended to kill them.
And the child Samuel grew on, and increased in favor both with Jehovah, and also with men.
And there came a man of God to Eli, and said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Did I reveal myself to the house of thy father when they were in Egypt in bondage to Pharaoh's house?
And did I choose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my priest, to go up to my altar, to burn incense, to wear an ephod before me? And did I give to the house of thy father all the offerings of the sons of Israel made by fire?
Why do ye kick at my sacrifice and at my offering, which I have commanded in my habitation, and honor thy sons above me, to make yourselves fat with the chief of all the offerings of Israel my people?
Therefore Jehovah, the God of Israel, says, I said indeed that thy house, and the house of thy father, should walk before me forever, but now Jehovah says, Be it far from me, for those who honor me I will honor, and those who despise me shall be lightly esteemed.
Behold, the days come, that I will cut off thine arm, and the arm of thy father's house, that there shall not be an old man in thy house.
And thou shall see an enemy in my habitation, in all that I shall give Israel, and there shall not be an old man in thy house forever.
And the man of thine, whom I shall not cut off from my altar, shall be to consume thine eyes, and to grieve thy heart. And all the increase of thy house shall die in the flower of their age.
In one day they shall die, both of them.
And I will raise up for me a faithful priest who shall do according to that which is in my heart and in my mind. And I will build for him a sure house, and he shall walk before my anointed forever.
And it shall come to pass, that everyone who is left in thy house shall come and bow down to him for a piece of silver and a loaf of bread, and shall say, Put me, I pray thee, into one of the priests' offices that I may eat a morsel of bread.

And the child Samuel served Jehovah before Eli. And the word of Jehovah was precious in those days; there was no frequent vision.
And it came to pass at that time, when Eli was laid down in his place (now his eyes had begun to grow dim so that he could not see),
and the lamp of God was not yet gone out, and Samuel was laid down in the temple of Jehovah where the ark of God was,
that Jehovah called Samuel. And he said, Here I am.
And he ran to Eli, and said, Here I am, for thou called me. And he said, I did not call. Lie down again. And he went and lay down.
And Jehovah called yet again, Samuel. And Samuel arose and went to Eli, and said, Here I am, for thou called me. And he answered, I did not call, my son. Lie down again.
Now Samuel did not yet know Jehovah, neither was the word of Jehovah yet revealed to him.
And Jehovah called Samuel again the third time. And he arose and went to Eli, and said, Here I am, for thou called me. And Eli perceived that Jehovah had called the child.
Therefore Eli said to Samuel, Go, lie down, and it shall be, if he calls thee, that thou shall say, Speak, Jehovah, for thy servant hears. So Samuel went and lay down in his place.
And Jehovah came, and stood, and called as at other times, Samuel, Samuel. Then Samuel said, Speak, for thy servant hears.
And Jehovah said to Samuel, Behold, I will do a thing in Israel at which both the ears of everyone who hears it shall tingle.
In that day I will perform against Eli all that I have spoken concerning his house, from the beginning even to the end.
For I have told him that I will judge his house forever, for the iniquity which he knew, because his sons brought a curse upon themselves, and he did not restrain them.
And therefore I have sworn to the house of Eli that the iniquity of Eli's house shall not be expiated with sacrifice nor offering forever.
And Samuel lay until the morning, and opened the doors of the house of Jehovah. And Samuel was afraid to show Eli the vision.
Then Eli called Samuel, and said, Samuel, my son. And he said, Here I am.
And he said, What is the thing that Jehovah has spoken to thee? I pray thee, hide it not from me. God do so to thee, and more also, if thou hide anything from me of all the things that he spoke to thee.
And Samuel told him every whit, and hid nothing from him. And he said, It is Jehovah. Let him do what seems him good.
And Samuel grew, and Jehovah was with him, and let none of his words fall to the ground.
And all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that Samuel was established to be a prophet of Jehovah.
And Jehovah appeared again in Shiloh, for Jehovah revealed himself to Samuel in Shiloh by the word of Jehovah.

And the word of Samuel came to all Israel. Now Israel went out against the Philistines to battle, and encamped beside Ebenezer, and the Philistines encamped in Aphek.
And the Philistines put themselves in array against Israel. And when they joined battle, Israel was smitten before the Philistines; and they killed of the army in the field about four thousand men.
And when the people came into the camp, the elders of Israel said, Why has Jehovah smitten us today before the Philistines? Let us fetch the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of Shiloh to us, that it may come among us, and save us out of the hand of our enemies.
So the people sent to Shiloh, and they brought from there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah of hosts, who sits above the cherubim. And the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were there with the ark of the covenant of God.
And when the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came into the camp, all Israel shouted with a great shout, so that the earth rang again.
And when the Philistines heard the noise of the shout, they said, What is the meaning of the noise of this great shout in the camp of the Hebrews? And they understood that the ark of Jehovah came into the camp.
And the Philistines were afraid, for they said, God has come into the camp. And they said, Woe to us! For there has not been such a thing heretofore.
Woe to us! Who shall deliver us out of the hand of these mighty gods? These are the gods that smote the Egyptians with all manner of plagues in the wilderness.
Be strong, and strengthen yourselves like men, O ye Philistines, that ye be not servants to the Hebrews, as they have been to you. Conduct yourselves like men, and fight.
And the Philistines fought, and Israel was smitten, and they fled every man to his tent. And there was a very great slaughter, for there fell of Israel thirty thousand footmen.
And the ark of God was taken, and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, were killed.
And there ran a man of Benjamin out of the army, and came to Shiloh the same day, with his clothes torn, and with dirt upon his head.
And when he came, lo, Eli was sitting upon his seat by the wayside watching, for his heart trembled for the ark of God. And when the man came into the city, and told it, all the city cried out.
And when Eli heard the noise of the crying, he said, What does the noise of this tumult mean? And the man hastened, and came and told Eli.
Now Eli was ninety-eight years old, and his eyes were dim so that he could not see.
And the man said to Eli, I am he who came out of the army, and I fled today out of the army. And he said, How did the matter go, my son?
And he who brought the news answered and said, Israel has fled before the Philistines, and there has been also a great slaughter among the people. And thy two sons also, Hophni and Phinehas, are dead, and the ark of God is taken.
And it came to pass, when he made mention of the ark of God, that Eli fell from off his seat backward by the side of the gate. And his neck broke, and he died, for he was an old man, and heavy. And he had judged Israel forty years.
And his daughter-in-law, Phinehas' wife, was with child, near to be delivered. And when she heard the news that the ark of God was taken, and that her father-in-law and her husband were dead, she bowed herself and brought forth, for her pains came upon her.
And about the time of her death the women who stood by her said to her, Fear not, for thou have brought forth a son. But she did not answer, neither did she regard it.
And she named the child Ichabod, saying, The glory has departed from Israel, because the ark of God was taken, and because of her father-in-law and her husband.
And she said, The glory has departed from Israel, for the ark of God is taken.

Now the Philistines had taken the ark of God, and they brought it from Ebenezer to Ashdod.
And the Philistines took the ark of God, and brought it into the house of Dagon, and set it by Dagon.
And when those of Ashdod arose early on the morrow, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of Jehovah. And they took Dagon, and set him in his place again.
And when they arose early on the morning of the morrow, behold, Dagon was fallen upon his face to the ground before the ark of Jehovah, and the head of Dagon and both the palms of his hands lay cut off upon the threshold. Only the stump of Dagon was left to him.
Therefore neither the priests of Dagon, nor any who come into Dagon's house, tread on the threshold of Dagon in Ashdod, to this day.
But the hand of Jehovah was heavy upon them of Ashdod, and he destroyed them, and smote them with tumors, even Ashdod and the borders of it.
And when the men of Ashdod saw that it was so, they said, The ark of the God of Israel shall not abide with us, for his hand is hard upon us, and upon Dagon our god.
They sent therefore and gathered all the lords of the Philistines to them, and said, What shall we do with the ark of the God of Israel? And they answered, Let the ark of the God of Israel be carried about to Gath. And they carried the ark of the God of Israel there.
And it was so, that, after they had carried it about, the hand of Jehovah was against the city with a very great discomfiture. And he smote the men of the city, both small and great, and tumors broke out upon them.
So they sent the ark of God to Ekron. And it came to pass, as the ark of God came to Ekron, that the Ekronites cried out, saying, They have brought about the ark of the God of Israel to us, to kill us and our people.
They sent therefore and gathered together all the lords of the Philistines, and they said, Send away the ark of the God of Israel, and let it go again to its own place, that it not kill us and our people. For there was a deadly discomfiture throughout all the city; the hand of God was very heavy there.
And the men who did not die were smitten with the tumors, and the cry of the city went up to heaven.

And the ark of Jehovah was in the country of the Philistines seven months.
And the Philistines called for the priests and the psychics, saying, What shall we do with the ark of Jehovah? Show us with what we shall sent it to its place.
And they said, If ye send away the ark of the God of Israel, do not send it empty, but by all means return for him a trespass offering. Then ye shall be healed, and it shall be known to you why his hand is not removed from you.
Then they said, What shall be the trespass offering which we shall return to him? And they said, Five golden tumors, and five golden mice, according to the number of the lords of the Philistines, for one plague was on you all, and on your lords.
Therefore ye shall make images of your tumors, and images of your mice that mar the land. And ye shall give glory to the God of Israel. Perhaps he will lighten his hand from off you, and from off your gods, and from off your land.
Why then do ye harden your hearts as the Egyptians and Pharaoh hardened their hearts? When he had wrought wonderfully among them, did they not let the people go, and they departed?
Now therefore take and prepare for you a new cart, and two milk cows on which there has come no yoke. And tie the cows to the cart, and bring their calves home from them.
And take the ark of Jehovah, and lay it upon the cart. And put the jewels of gold, which ye return to him for a trespass offering, in a coffer by the side of it, and send it away, that it may go.
And watch. If it goes up by the way of its own border to Beth-shemesh, then he has done to us this great evil, but if not, then we shall know that it is not his hand that smote us; it was a chance that happened to us.
And the men did so, and took two milk cows, and tied them to the cart, and shut up their calves at home.
And they put the ark of Jehovah upon the cart, and the coffer with the mice of gold and the images of their tumors.
And the cows took the straight way by the way to Beth-shemesh. They went along the highway, lowing as they went, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left. And the lords of the Philistines went behind them to the border of Beth-shemesh.
And those of Beth-shemesh were reaping their wheat harvest in the valley. And they lifted up their eyes, and saw the ark, and rejoiced to see it.
And the cart came into the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite, and stood there where there was a great stone. And they split the wood of the cart, and offered up the cows for a burnt offering to Jehovah.
And the Levites took down the ark of Jehovah, and the coffer that was with it, in which the jewels of gold were, and put them on the great stone. And the men of Beth-shemesh offered burnt offerings and sacrificed sacrifices the same day to Jehovah.
And when the five lords of the Philistines had seen it, they returned to Ekron the same day.
for Ashdod one, for Gaza one, for Ashkelon one, for Gath one, for Ekron one.
And the golden mice, according to the number of all the cities of the Philistines belonging to the five lords, both of fortified cities and of country villages, even to the great stone on which they set down the ark of Jehovah, which stone remains to this day in the field of Joshua the Beth-shemite.
And he smote of the men of Beth-shemesh, because they had looked into the ark of Jehovah. He smote of the people fifty thousand and seventy men. And the people mourned, because Jehovah had smitten the people with a great slaughter.
And the men of Beth-shemesh said, Who is able to stand before Jehovah, this holy God? And to whom shall he go up from us?
And they sent messengers to the inhabitants of Kiriath-jearim, saying, The Philistines have brought back the ark of Jehovah. Come ye down, and fetch it up to you.

And the men of Kiriath-jearim came, and fetched up the ark of Jehovah, and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill, and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of Jehovah.
And it came to pass, from the day that the ark abode in Kiriath-jearim, that the time was long, for it was twenty years, and all the house of Israel lamented after Jehovah.
And Samuel spoke to all the house of Israel, saying, If ye do return to Jehovah with all your heart, then put away the foreign gods and the Ashtaroth from among you, and direct your hearts to Jehovah, and serve him only. And he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines.
Then the sons of Israel did put away the Baalim and the Ashtaroth, and served Jehovah only.
And Samuel said, Gather all Israel to Mizpah, and I will pray for you to Jehovah.
And they gathered together to Mizpah, and drew water, and poured it out before Jehovah, and fasted on that day, and said there, We have sinned against Jehovah. And Samuel judged the sons of Israel in Mizpah.
And when the Philistines heard that the sons of Israel were gathered together to Mizpah, the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel. And when the sons of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the Philistines.
And the sons of Israel said to Samuel, Do not cease to cry to Jehovah our God for us, that he will save us out of the hand of the Philistines.
And Samuel took a sucking lamb, and offered it for a whole burnt offering to Jehovah. And Samuel cried to Jehovah for Israel, and Jehovah answered him.
And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel, but Jehovah thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them, and they were smitten down before Israel.
And the men of Israel went out of Mizpah, and pursued the Philistines, and smote them until they came under Beth-car.
Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpah and Shen, and called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Jehovah has helped us to now.
So the Philistines were subdued, and they came no more within the border of Israel, and the hand of Jehovah was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel.
And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored to Israel, from Ekron even to Gath. And Israel delivered the border of it out of the hand of the Philistines. And there was peace between Israel and the Amorites.
And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life.
And he went from year to year in circuit to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpah. And he judged Israel in all those places.
And his return was to Ramah, for his house was there. And there he judged Israel, and there he built an altar to Jehovah.

And it came to pass, when Samuel was old, that he made his sons judges over Israel.
Now the name of his firstborn was Joel, and the name of his second, Abijah. They were judges in Beersheba.
And his sons did not walk in his ways, but turned aside after dishonest gain, and took bribes, and perverted justice.
Then all the elders of Israel gathered themselves together, and came to Samuel to Ramah.
And they said to him, Behold, thou are old, and thy sons do not walk in thy ways. Now make for us a king to judge us like all the nations.
But the thing displeased Samuel when they said, Give us a king to judge us. And Samuel prayed to Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Samuel, Hearken to the voice of the people in all that they say to thee, for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not be king over them.
According to all the works which they have done since the day that I brought them up out of Egypt even to this day, in that they have forsaken me, and served other gods, so do they also to thee.
Now therefore hearken to their voice. However thou shall protest solemnly to them, and shall show them the manner of the king who shall reign over them.
And Samuel told all the words of Jehovah to the people who asked of him a king.
He will take your sons, and appoint them to him for his chariots, and to be his horsemen, and they shall run before his chariots.
And he will appoint them to him for captains of thousands, and captains of fifties. And he will set some to plow his ground, and to reap his harvest, and to make his instruments of war, and the instruments of his chariots.
And he will take your daughters to be perfumers, and to be cooks, and to be bakers.
And he will take your fields, and your vineyards, and your oliveyards, even the best of them, and give them to his servants.
And he will take the tenth of your seed, and of your vineyards, and give to his officers, and to his servants.
And he will take your men-servants, and your maid-servants, and your finest young men, and your donkeys, and put them to his work.
He will take the tenth of your flocks. And ye shall be his servants.
And ye shall cry out in that day because of your king whom ye shall have chosen you, and Jehovah will not answer you in that day.
But the people refused to hearken to the voice of Samuel. And they said, No, but we will have a king over us
that we also may be like all the nations, and that our king may judge us, and go out before us, and fight our battles.
And Samuel heard all the words of the people, and he repeated them in the ears of Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Samuel, Hearken to their voice, and make for them a king. And Samuel said to the men of Israel, Go ye every man to his city.

Now there was a man of Benjamin whose name was Kish, the son of Abiel, the son of Zeror, the son of Becorath, the son of Aphiah, the son of a Benjamite, a mighty man of valor.
And he had a son whose name was Saul, a young man and fine looking. And there was not among the sons of Israel a man better looking than he. From his shoulders and upward he was taller than any of the people.
And the donkeys of Kish, Saul's father, were lost. And Kish said to Saul his son, Take now one of the servants with thee, and arise, go seek the donkeys.
And he passed through the hill-country of Ephraim, and passed through the land of Shalishah, but they did not find them. Then they passed through the land of Shaalim, and they were not there. And he passed through the land of the Benjamites, but they did not find them.
When they came to the land of Zuph, Saul said to his servant who was with him, Come, and let us return, lest my father leave off caring for the donkeys, and be anxious for us.
And he said to him, Behold now, there is in this city a man of God, and he is a man who is held in honor. All that he says comes surely to pass. Now let us go there, perhaps he can tell us concerning our journey on which we go.
Then Saul said to his servant, But behold, if we go, what shall we bring the man? For the bread is spent in our vessels, and there is not a present to bring to the man of God. What have we?
And the servant answered Saul again, and said, Behold, I have in my hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver. I will give that to the man of God, to tell us our way.
(Formerly in Israel, when a man went to inquire of God, thus he said, Come, and let us go to the seer, for he who is now called a Prophet was formerly called a Seer.)
Then Saul said to his servant, Well said. Come, let us go. So they went to the city where the man of God was.
As they went up the ascent to the city, they found young maidens going out to draw water, and said to them, Is the seer here?
And they answered them, and said, He is. Behold, he is before thee. Make haste now, for he has come today into the city, for the people have a sacrifice today in the high place.
As soon as ye have come into the city, ye shall straightaway find him before he goes up to the high place to eat. For the people will not eat until he comes, because he blesses the sacrifice, and afterwards those who are bidden eat. Now therefore get you up, for at this time ye shall find him.
And they went up to the city. And as they came within the city, behold, Samuel came out toward them, to go up to the high place.
Now Jehovah had revealed to Samuel a day before Saul came, saying,
Tomorrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of Benjamin, and thou shall anoint him to be prince over my people Israel. And he shall save my people out of the hand of the Philistines, for I have looked upon my people, because their cry has come to me.
And when Samuel saw Saul, Jehovah said to him, Behold, the man of whom I spoke to thee! This man shall have authority over my people.
Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate, and said, Tell me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is.
And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer. Go up before me to the high place, for ye shall eat with me today. And in the morning I will let thee go, and will tell thee all that is in thy heart.
And as for thy donkeys that were lost three days ago, set not thy mind on them, for they are found. And for whom is all that is desirable in Israel? Is it not for thee, and for all thy father's house?
And Saul answered and said, Am I not a Benjamite, of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? And my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin? Why then speak thou to me according to this manner?
And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the guest-chamber, and made them sit in the chief place among those who were bidden, who were about thirty men.
And Samuel said to the cook, Bring the portion which I gave thee, of which I said to thee, Set it by thee.
And the cook took up the thigh, and that which was upon it, and set it before Saul. And Samuel said, Behold, that which has been reserved! Set it before thee and eat, because it has been kept for thee to the appointed time, for I said, I have invited the people. So Saul ate with Samuel that day.
And when they came down from the high place into the city, he conversed with Saul upon the housetop.
And they arose early. And it came to pass about the dawning of the day, that Samuel called to Saul on the housetop, saying, Up, that I may send thee away. And Saul arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad.
As they were going down at the end of the city, Samuel said to Saul, Bid the servant pass on before us (and he passed on), but stand thou still first, that I may cause thee to hear the word of God.

Then Samuel took the vial of oil, and poured it upon his head, and kissed him, and said, Is it not that Jehovah has anointed thee to be prince over his inheritance?
When thou are departed from me today, then thou shall find two men by Rachel's sepulcher in the border of Benjamin at Zelzah. And they will say to thee, The donkeys which thou went to seek are found, and, lo, thy father has left off caring for the donkeys, and is anxious for you, saying, What shall I do for my son?
Then thou shall go on forward from there, and thou shall come to the oak of Tabor. And there shall meet thee there three men going up to God to Bethel, one carrying three kids, and another carrying three loaves of bread, and another carrying a bottle of wine.
And they will salute thee, and give thee two loaves of bread, which thou shall receive from their hand.
After that thou shall come to the hill of God where is the garrison of the Philistines. And it shall come to pass, when thou have come there to the city, that thou shall meet a band of prophets coming down from the high place with a psaltery, and a timbrel, and a pipe, and a harp, before them, and they will be prophesying.
And the Spirit of Jehovah will come mightily upon thee, and thou shall prophesy with them, and shall be turned into another man.
And let it be, when these signs have come to thee, that thou do as occasion shall serve thee, for God is with thee.
And thou shall go down before me to Gilgal. And, behold, I will come down to thee, to offer burnt offerings, and to sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings. Thou shall tarry seven days till I come to thee, and show thee what thou shall do.
And it was so, that, when he had turned his back to go from Samuel, God gave him another heart. And all those signs came to pass that day.
And when they came there to the hill, behold, a band of prophets met him. And the Spirit of God came mightily upon him, and he prophesied among them.
And it came to pass, when all who knew him formerly saw, that, behold, he prophesied with the prophets, then the people said one to another, What is this that has come to the son of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?
And a man from the same place answered and said, And who is their father? Therefore it became a proverb, Is Saul also among the prophets?
And when he had made an end of prophesying, he came to the high place.
And Saul's uncle said to him and to his servant, Where did ye go? And he said, To seek the donkeys, and when we saw that they were not found, we came to Samuel.
And Saul's uncle said, Tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said to you.
And Saul said to his uncle, He told us plainly that the donkeys were found. But concerning the matter of the kingdom, of which Samuel spoke, he did not tell him.
And Samuel called the people together to Jehovah to Mizpah.
And he said to the sons of Israel, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, I brought up Israel out of Egypt, and I delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of all the kingdoms that oppressed you,
but ye have this day rejected your God who himself saves you out of all your calamities and your distresses, and ye have said to him, No, but set a king over us. Now therefore present yourselves before Jehovah by your tribes, and by your thousands.
So Samuel brought all the tribes of Israel near, and the tribe of Benjamin was taken.
And he brought the tribe of Benjamin near by their families, and the family of the Matrites was taken, and Saul the son of Kish was taken. But when they sought him, he could not be found.
Therefore they asked of Jehovah further, Is there yet a man to come here? And Jehovah answered, Behold, he has hid himself among the baggage.
And they ran and fetched him from there. And when he stood among the people, he was higher than any of the people from his shoulders and upward.
And Samuel said to all the people, See ye him whom Jehovah has chosen, that there is none like him among all the people? And all the people shouted, and said, Live, O king!
Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before Jehovah. And Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house.
And Saul also went to his house to Gibeah, and mighty men went with him, whose hearts God had touched.
But certain worthless fellows said, How shall this man save us? And they despised him, and brought him no present. But he held his peace.

Then Nahash the Ammonite came up, and encamped against Jabesh-gilead. And all the men of Jabesh said to Nahash, Make a covenant with us, and we will serve thee.
And Nahash the Ammonite said to them, On this condition will I make it with you, that all your right eyes be put out, and I will lay it for a reproach upon all Israel.
And the elders of Jabesh said to him, Give us seven days' respite that we may send messengers to all the borders of Israel, and then, if there be none to save us, we will come out to thee.
Then the messengers came to Gibeah of Saul, and spoke these words in the ears of the people. And all the people lifted up their voice, and wept.
And, behold, Saul came following the oxen out of the field, and Saul said, What troubles the people that they weep? And they told him the words of the men of Jabesh.
And the Spirit of God came mightily upon Saul when he heard those words, and his anger was greatly kindled.
And he took a yoke of oxen, and cut them in pieces, and sent them throughout all the borders of Israel by the hand of messengers, saying, Whoever does not come forth behind Saul and behind Samuel, so shall it be done to his oxen. And the dread of Jehovah fell on the people, and they came out as one man.
And he numbered them in Bezek, and the sons of Israel were three hundred thousand, and the men of Judah thirty thousand.
And they said to the messengers who came, Thus ye shall say to the men of Jabesh-gilead, Tomorrow, by the time the sun is hot, ye shall have deliverance. And the messengers came and told the men of Jabesh, and they were glad.
Therefore the men of Jabesh said, Tomorrow we will come out to you, and ye shall do with us all that seems good to you.
And it was so on the morrow, that Saul put the people in three companies. And they came into the midst of the camp in the morning watch, and smote the Ammonites until the heat of the day. And it came to pass, that those who remained were scattered so that not two of them were left together.
And the people said to Samuel, Who is he who said, Shall Saul reign over us? Bring the men that we may put them to death.
And Saul said, There shall not a man be put to death this day, for today Jehovah has wrought deliverance in Israel.
Then Samuel said to the people, Come, and let us go to Gilgal, and renew the kingdom there.
And all the people went to Gilgal. And there they made Saul king before Jehovah in Gilgal, and there they offered sacrifices of peace offerings before Jehovah, and there Saul and all the men of Israel rejoiced greatly.

And Samuel said to all Israel, Behold, I have hearkened to your voice in all that ye said to me, and have made a king over you.
And now, behold, the king walks before you. And I am old and gray headed, and, behold, my sons are with you. And I have walked before you from my youth to this day.
Whose ox have I taken? Or whose donkey have I taken? Or whom have I defrauded? Whom have I oppressed? Or of whose hand have I taken a bribe to blind my eyes with it? And I will restore it to you.
And they said, Thou have not defrauded us, nor oppressed us, neither have thou taken anything of any man's hand.
And he said to them, Jehovah is witness against you, and his anointed is witness this day, that ye have not found anything in my hand. And they said, He is witness.
And Samuel said to the people, It is Jehovah who appointed Moses and Aaron, and who brought your fathers up out of the land of Egypt.
Now therefore stand still that I may plead with you before Jehovah concerning all the righteous acts of Jehovah, which he did to you and to your fathers.
When Jacob had come into Egypt, and your fathers cried to Jehovah, then Jehovah sent Moses and Aaron who brought forth your fathers out of Egypt, and made them to dwell in this place.
But they forgot Jehovah their God, and he sold them into the hand of Sisera, captain of the army of Hazor, and into the hand of the Philistines, and into the hand of the king of Moab, and they fought against them.
And they cried to Jehovah, and said, We have sinned because we have forsaken Jehovah, and have served the Baalim and the Ashtaroth, but now deliver us out of the hand of our enemies, and we will serve thee.
And Jehovah sent Jerubbaal, and Bedan, and Jephthah, and Samuel, and delivered you out of the hand of your enemies on every side, and ye dwelt in safety.
And when ye saw that Nahash the king of the sons of Ammon came against you, ye said to me, No, but a king shall reign over us, when Jehovah your God was your king.
Now therefore behold the king whom ye have chosen, and whom ye have asked for. And, behold, Jehovah has set a king over you.
If ye will fear Jehovah, and serve him, and hearken to his voice, and not rebel against the commandment of Jehovah, then both ye and also the king who reigns over you shall be followers of Jehovah your God.
But if ye will not hearken to the voice of Jehovah, but rebel against the commandment of Jehovah, then the hand of Jehovah will be against you as it was against your fathers.
Now therefore stand still and see this great thing, which Jehovah will do before your eyes.
Is it not wheat harvest today? I will call to Jehovah that he may send thunder and rain, and ye shall know and see that your wickedness is great, which ye have done in the sight of Jehovah in asking a king for you.
So Samuel called to Jehovah, and Jehovah sent thunder and rain that day. And all the people greatly feared Jehovah and Samuel.
And all the people said to Samuel, Pray for thy servants to Jehovah thy God that we not die, for we have added to all our sins this evil, to ask a king for us.
And Samuel said to the people, Fear not. Ye have indeed done all this evil, yet turn not aside from following Jehovah, but serve Jehovah with all your heart.
And turn ye not aside after vain things which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain.
For Jehovah will not forsake his people for his great name's sake, because it has pleased Jehovah to make you a people to himself.
Moreover as for me, far be it from me that I should sin against Jehovah in ceasing to pray for you. But I will instruct you in the good and the right way.
Only fear Jehovah, and serve him in truth with all your heart, for consider what great things he has done for you.
But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be consumed, both ye and your king.

Saul was  years old when he began to reign. And when he had reigned two years over Israel,
Saul chose for him three thousand men of Israel, of which two thousand were with Saul in Michmash, and on the mount of Bethel, and a thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin, and the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent.
And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba, and the Philistines heard of it. And Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land, saying, Let the Hebrews hear.
And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten the garrison of the Philistines, and also that Israel was had in abomination with the Philistines. And the people were gathered together after Saul to Gilgal.
thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen, and people as the sand which is on the sea-shore in multitude. And they came up, and encamped in Michmash, eastward of Beth-aven.
When the men of Israel saw that they were in a strait (for the people were distressed), then the people hid themselves in caves, and in thickets, and in rocks, and in coverts, and in pits.
Now some of the Hebrews had gone over the Jordan to the land of Gad and Gilead, but as for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal, and all the people followed him trembling.
And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had appointed, but Samuel did not come to Gilgal, and the people were scattered from him.
And Saul said, Bring here the burnt offering to me, and the peace offerings. And he offered the burnt offering.
And it came to pass that, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, behold, Samuel came, and Saul went out to meet him, that he might salute him.
And Samuel said, What have thou done? And Saul said, Because I saw that the people were scattered from me, and that thou did not come within the days appointed, and that the Philistines assembled themselves together at Michmash,
therefore I said, Now the Philistines will come down upon me to Gilgal, and I have not entreated the favor of Jehovah. I forced myself therefore, and offered the burnt offering.
And Samuel said to Saul, Thou have done foolishly. Thou have not kept the commandment of Jehovah thy God, which he commanded thee. For now Jehovah would have established thy kingdom upon Israel forever,
but now thy kingdom shall not continue. Jehovah has sought for him a man after his own heart, and Jehovah has appointed him to be prince over his people, because thou have not kept that which Jehovah commanded thee.
And Samuel arose, and got up from Gilgal to Gibeah of Benjamin. And Saul numbered the people who were present with him, about six hundred men.
And Saul, and Jonathan his son, and the people that were present with them, abode in Geba of Benjamin, but the Philistines encamped in Michmash.
And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in three companies. One company turned to the way that leads to Ophrah, to the land of Shual,
and another company turned the way to Beth-horon, and another company turned the way of the border that looks down upon the valley of Zeboim toward the wilderness.
Now there was no blacksmith found throughout all the land of Israel, for the Philistines said, Lest the Hebrews make for them swords or spears,
but all the Israelites went down to the Philistines to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter, and his axe, and his mattock.
Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the forks, and for the axes, and to set the goads.
So it came to pass in the day of battle, that there was neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the people who were with Saul and Jonathan. But with Saul and with Jonathan his son there was found.
And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the pass of Michmash.

Now it fell upon a day that Jonathan the son of Saul said to the young man who bore his armor, Come, and let us go over to the Philistines' garrison that is on yonder side. But he did not tell his father.
And Saul abode in the outermost part of Gibeah under the pomegranate tree which is in Migron. And the people who were with him were about six hundred men,
and Ahijah, the son of Ahitub, Ichabod's brother, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eli, the priest of Jehovah in Shiloh, wearing an ephod. And the people did not know that Jonathan was gone.
And between the passes by which Jonathan sought to go over to the Philistines' garrison, there was a rocky crag on the one side, and a rocky crag on the other side. And the name of the one was Bozez, and the name of the other Seneh.
The one crag rose up on the north in front of Michmash, and the other on the south in front of Geba.
And Jonathan said to the young man who bore his armor, Come, and let us go over to the garrison of these uncircumcised. It may be that Jehovah will work for us, for there is no limitation to Jehovah to save by many or by few.
And his armor bearer said to him, Do all that is in thy heart. Turn thee, behold, I am with thee according to thy heart.
Then Jonathan said, Behold, we will pass over to the men, and we will disclose ourselves to them.
If they say thus to us, Tarry until we come to you, then we will stand still in our place, and will not go up to them.
But if they say thus, Come up to us, then we will go up, for Jehovah has delivered them into our hand, and this shall be the sign to us.
And both of them disclosed themselves to the garrison of the Philistines. And the Philistines said, Behold, the Hebrews come forth out of the holes where they had hid themselves.
And the men of the garrison answered Jonathan and his armor bearer, and said, Come up to us, and we will show you a thing. And Jonathan said to his armor bearer, Come up after me, for Jehovah has delivered them into the hand of Israel.
And Jonathan climbed up upon his hands and upon his feet, and his armor bearer after him. And they fell before Jonathan, and his armor bearer killed them after him.
And that first slaughter, which Jonathan and his armor bearer made, was about twenty men, within as it were half a furrow's length in an acre of land.
And there was a trembling in the camp, in the field, and among all the people. The garrison, and the spoilers, they also trembled. And the earth quaked, so there was an exceedingly great trembling.
And the watchmen of Saul in Gibeah of Benjamin looked, and, behold, the multitude melted away, and they went here and there.
Then Saul said to the people who were with him, Number now, and see who has gone from us. And when they had numbered, behold, Jonathan and his armor bearer were not there.
And Saul said to Ahijah, Bring here the ark of God. For the ark of God was there at that time with the sons of Israel.
And it came to pass, while Saul talked to the priest, that the tumult that was in the camp of the Philistines went on and increased. And Saul said to the priest, Withdraw thy hand.
And Saul and all the people who were with him were gathered together, and came to the battle. And, behold, every man's sword was against his fellow, and there was a very great discomfiture.
Now the Hebrews who were with the Philistines as formerly, and who went up with them into the camp, from the country round about, even they also turned to be with the Israelites who were with Saul and Jonathan.
Likewise all the men of Israel who had hid themselves in the hill-country of Ephraim, when they heard that the Philistines fled, even they also followed close after them in the battle.
So Jehovah saved Israel that day, and the battle passed over by Beth-aven.
And the men of Israel were distressed that day, for Saul had adjured the people, saying, Cursed be the man who eats any food until it be evening, and I be avenged on my enemies. So none of the people tasted food.
And all the people came into the forest, and there was honey upon the ground.
And when the people came to the forest, behold, the honey dropped, but no man put his hand to his mouth, for the people feared the oath.
But Jonathan heard not when his father charged the people with the oath, therefore he put forth the end of the rod that was in his hand, and dipped it in the honeycomb, and put his hand to his mouth, and his eyes were enlightened.
Then one of the people answered, and said, Thy father strictly charged the people with an oath, saying, Cursed be the man who eats food this day, and the people were faint.
Then Jonathan said, My father has troubled the land. See, I pray you, how my eyes have been enlightened because I tasted a little of this honey.
How much more, if haply the people had eaten freely today of the spoil of their enemies which they found? For now there has been no great slaughter among the Philistines.
And they smote of the Philistines that day from Michmash to Aijalon. And the people were very faint,
and the people flew upon the spoil, and took sheep, and oxen, and calves, and killed them on the ground. And the people ate them with the blood.
Then they told Saul, saying, Behold, the people sin against Jehovah, in that they eat with the blood. And he said, ye have dealt treacherously. Roll a great stone to me this day.
And Saul said, Disperse yourselves among the people, and say to them, Bring me here every man his ox, and every man his sheep, and kill them here, and eat. And sin not against Jehovah in eating with the blood. And all the people brought every man his ox with him that night, and killed them there.
And Saul built an altar to Jehovah; the same was the first altar that he built to Jehovah.
And Saul said, Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and take spoil among them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them. And they said, Do whatever seems good to thee. Then the priest said, Let us draw near here to God.
And Saul asked counsel of God, Shall I go down after the Philistines? Will thou deliver them into the hand of Israel? But he did not answer him that day.
And Saul said, Draw near here, all ye chiefs of the people, and know and see how this sin has been this day.
For, as Jehovah lives, who saves Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall surely die. But there was not a man among all the people who answered him.
Then he said to all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said to Saul, Do what seems good to thee.
Therefore Saul said to Jehovah, the God of Israel, Show the right. And Jonathan and Saul were taken by lot, but the people escaped.
And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan was taken.
Then Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou have done. And Jonathan told him, and said, I did certainly taste a little honey with the end of the rod that was in my hand. And, lo, I must die.
And Saul said, God do so and more also, for thou shall surely die, Jonathan.
And the people said to Saul, Shall Jonathan die, who has wrought this great salvation in Israel? Far from it. As Jehovah lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground, for he has wrought with God this day. So the people rescued Jonathan, that he did not die.
Then Saul went up from following the Philistines, and the Philistines went to their own place.
Now when Saul had taken the kingdom over Israel, he fought against all his enemies on every side, against Moab, and against the sons of Ammon, and against Edom, and against the kings of Zobah, and against the Philistines. And wherever he turned himself, he put them to the worse.
And he did valiantly, and smote the Amalekites, and delivered Israel out of the hands of those who despoiled them.
the name of the firstborn Merab, and the name of the younger Michal.
And the name of Saul's wife was Ahinoam the daughter of Ahimaaz. And the name of the captain of his army was Abner the son of Ner, Saul's uncle.
And Kish was the father of Saul, and Ner the father of Abner was the son of Abiel.
And there was great war against the Philistines all the days of Saul. And when Saul saw any mighty man, or any valiant man, he took him to him.

And Samuel said to Saul, Jehovah sent me to anoint thee to be king over his people, over Israel. Now therefore hearken thou to the voice of the words of Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, I have remembered that which Amalek did to Israel, how he set himself against him in the way when he came up out of Egypt.
Now go and smite Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not, but kill both man and woman, infant and suckling, ox and sheep, camel and donkey.
And Saul summoned the people, and numbered them in Telaim, two hundred thousand footmen, and ten thousand men of Judah.
And Saul came to the city of Amalek, and laid wait in the valley.
And Saul said to the Kenites, Go, depart, get you down from among the Amalekites, lest I destroy you with them, for ye showed kindness to all the sons of Israel when they came up out of Egypt. So the Kenites departed from among the Amalekites.
And Saul smote the Amalekites, from Havilah as thou go to Shur, that is before Egypt.
And he took Agag the king of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the people with the edge of the sword.
But Saul and the people spared Agag, and the best of the sheep, and of the oxen, and of the fatlings, and the lambs, and all that was good, and would not utterly destroy them. But everything that was vile and refuse, that they destroyed utterly.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Samuel, saying,
I regret that I have set up Saul to be king, for he has turned back from following me, and has not performed my commandments. And Samuel was angry, and he cried out to Jehovah all night.
And Samuel rose early to meet Saul in the morning, and it was told Samuel, saying, Saul came to Carmel, and, behold, he set up for him a monument, and turned, and passed on, and went down to Gilgal.
And Samuel came to Saul. And Saul said to him, Blessed be thou of Jehovah. I have performed the commandment of Jehovah.
And Samuel said, What then means this bleating of the sheep in my ears, and the lowing of the oxen which I hear?
And Saul said, They have brought them from the Amalekites, for the people spared the best of the sheep and of the oxen to sacrifice to Jehovah thy God, and the rest we have utterly destroyed.
Then Samuel said to Saul, Stop, and I will tell thee what Jehovah has said to me this night. And he said to him, Say on.
And Samuel said, Though thou were little in thine own sight, were thou not made the head of the tribes of Israel? And Jehovah anointed thee king over Israel.
And Jehovah sent thee on a journey, and said, Go, and utterly destroy the sinners, the Amalekites, and fight against them until they be consumed.
Why then did thou not obey the voice of Jehovah, but did fly upon the spoil, and did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah?
And Saul said to Samuel, Yes, I have obeyed the voice of Jehovah, and have gone the way which Jehovah sent me, and have brought Agag the king of Amalek, and have utterly destroyed the Amalekites.
But the people took of the spoil, sheep and oxen, the chief of the devoted things, to sacrifice to Jehovah thy God in Gilgal.
And Samuel said, Has Jehovah as great delight in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of Jehovah? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of rams.
For rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and stubbornness is as idolatry and teraphim. Because thou have rejected the word of Jehovah, he has also rejected thee from being king.
And Saul said to Samuel, I have sinned, for I have transgressed the commandment of Jehovah, and thy words, because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice.
Now therefore, I pray thee, pardon my sin, and turn again with me that I may worship Jehovah.
And Samuel said to Saul, I will not return with thee, for thou have rejected the word of Jehovah, and Jehovah has rejected thee from being king over Israel.
And as Samuel turned about to go away, Saul laid hold upon the skirt of his robe, and it tore.
And Samuel said to him, Jehovah has torn the kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and has given it to a neighbor of thine, who is better than thou.
And also the Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent, for he is not a man that he should repent.
Then he said, I have sinned. Yet honor me now, I pray thee, before the elders of my people, and before Israel, and turn again with me, that I may worship Jehovah thy God.
So Samuel turned again after Saul, and Saul worshiped Jehovah.
Then Samuel said, Bring ye here to me Agag the king of the Amalekites. And Agag came to him cheerfully. And Agag said, Surely the bitterness of death is past.
And Samuel said, As thy sword has made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women. And Samuel hewed Agag in pieces before Jehovah in Gilgal.
Then Samuel went to Ramah, and Saul went up to his house to Gibeah of Saul.
And Samuel came no more to see Saul until the day of his death, for Samuel mourned for Saul, and Jehovah regretted that he had made Saul king over Israel.

And Jehovah said to Samuel, How long will thou mourn for Saul, since I have rejected him from being king over Israel? Fill thy horn with oil, and go. I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite, for I have provided for me a king among his sons.
And Samuel said, How do I go? If Saul hears it, he will kill me. And Jehovah said, Take a heifer with thee, and say, I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah.
And call Jesse to the sacrifice, and I will show thee what thou shall do. And thou shall anoint to me him whom I name to thee.
And Samuel did that which Jehovah spoke, and came to Bethlehem. And the elders of the city came to meet him trembling, and said, Do thou come peaceably?
And he said, Peaceably; I have come to sacrifice to Jehovah. Sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice. And he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice.
And it came to pass, when they came, that he looked on Eliab, and said, Surely Jehovah's anointed is before him.
But Jehovah said to Samuel, Do not look on his countenance, or on the height of his stature, because I have rejected him. For Jehovah sees not as man sees, for man looks on the outward appearance, but Jehovah looks on the heart.
Then Jesse called Abinadab, and made him pass before Samuel. And he said, Neither has Jehovah chosen this man.
Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by. And he said, Neither has Jehovah chosen this man.
And Jesse made seven of his sons to pass before Samuel. And Samuel said to Jesse, Jehovah has not chosen these men.
And Samuel said to Jesse, Are all thy sons here? And he said, There remains yet the youngest, and, behold, he is keeping the sheep. And Samuel said to Jesse, Send and fetch him, for we will not sit down till he comes here.
And he sent, and brought him in. Now he was ruddy, and of a beautiful countenance, and fine to look upon. And Jehovah said, Arise, anoint him, for this is he.
Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his brothers. And the Spirit of Jehovah came mightily upon David from that day forward. So Samuel rose up, and went to Ramah.
Now the Spirit of Jehovah departed from Saul, and an evil spirit from Jehovah troubled him.
And Saul's servants said to him, Behold now, an evil spirit from God troubles thee.
Let our lord now command thy servants, who are before thee, to seek out a man who is a skilful player on the harp. And it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee, that he shall play with his hand, and thou shall be well.
And Saul said to his servants, Provide for me now a man who can play well, and bring him to me.
Then one of the young men answered, and said, Behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite who is skilful in playing, and a mighty man of valor, and a man of war, and prudent in speech, and a comely man, and Jehovah is with him.
Therefore Saul sent messengers to Jesse, and said, Send to me David thy son, who is with the sheep.
And Jesse took a donkey with bread, and a bottle of wine, and a kid, and sent them by David his son to Saul.
And David came to Saul, and stood before him. And he loved him greatly, and he became his armor bearer.
And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, Let David, I pray thee, stand before me, for he has found favor in my sight.
And it came to pass, when the spirit from God was upon Saul, that David took the harp, and played with his hand. So Saul was refreshed, and was well, and the evil spirit departed from him.

Now the Philistines gathered their armies together to battle. And they were gathered together at Socoh, which belongs to Judah, and encamped between Socoh and Azekah, in Ephes-dammim.
And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together, and encamped in the vale of Elah, and set the battle in array against the Philistines.
And the Philistines stood on the mountain on the one side, and Israel stood on the mountain on the other side, and there was a valley between them.
And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines, named Goliath, of Gath, whose height was six cubits and a span.
And he had a helmet of brass upon his head, and he was clad with a coat of mail. And the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass.
And he had greaves of brass upon his legs, and a javelin of brass between his shoulders.
And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam, and his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron. And his shield-bearer went before him.
And he stood and cried out to the armies of Israel, and said to them, Why have ye come out to set your battle in array? Am I not a Philistine, and ye servants to Saul? Choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me.
If he is able to fight with me, and kill me, then we will be your servants, but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then ye shall be our servants, and serve us.
And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day. Give me a man, that we may fight together.
And when Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid.
Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehem-judah, whose name was Jesse. And he had eight sons, and the man was an old man in the days of Saul, stricken in years among men.
And the three eldest sons of Jesse had gone after Saul to the battle. And the names of his three sons who went to the battle were Eliab the firstborn, and next to him Abinadab, and the third Shammah.
And David was the youngest, and the three eldest followed Saul.
Now David went to and fro from Saul to feed his father's sheep at Bethlehem.
And the Philistine drew near morning and evening, and presented himself forty days.
And Jesse said to David his son, Take now for thy brothers an ephah of this parched grain, and these ten loaves, and carry them quickly to the camp to thy brothers.
And bring these ten cheeses to the captain of their thousand. And look how thy brothers fare, and take their pledge.
Now Saul, and they, and all the men of Israel, were in the valley of Elah, fighting with the Philistines.
And David rose up early in the morning, and left the sheep with a keeper, and took, and went as Jesse had commanded him. And he came to the place of the wagons as the army which was going forth to the fight shouted for the battle.
And Israel and the Philistines put the battle in array, army against army.
And David left his baggage in the hand of the keeper of the baggage, and ran to the army, and came and saluted his brothers.
And as he talked with them, behold, there came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by name, out of the ranks of the Philistines, and spoke according to the same words, and David heard them.
And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man, fled from him, and were greatly afraid.
And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man who has come up? Surely to defy Israel he has come up. And it shall be, that the man who kills him, the king will enrich him with great riches, and will give him his daughter, and make his father's house free in Israel.
And David spoke to the men who stood by him, saying, What shall be done to the man who kills this Philistine, and takes away the reproach from Israel? For who is this uncircumcised Philistine that he should defy the armies of the living God?
And the people answered him after this manner, saying, So shall it be done to the man that kills him.
And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spoke to the men. And Eliab's anger was kindled against David, and he said, Why have thou come down? And with whom have thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? I know thy pride, and the mischief of thy heart, for thou have come down that thou might see the battle.
And David said, What have I now done? Is there not a cause?
And he turned away from him toward another, and spoke after the same manner, and the people answered him again after the former manner.
And when the words were heard which David spoke, they repeated them before Saul, and he sent for him.
And David said to Saul, Let no man's heart fail because of him. Thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine.
And Saul said to David, Thou are not able to go against this Philistine to fight with him, for thou are but a youth, and he a man of war from his youth.
And David said to Saul, Thy servant was keeping his father's sheep, and when there came a lion, or a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock,
I went out after him, and smote him, and delivered it out of his mouth. And when he arose against me, I caught him by his beard, and smote him, and killed him.
Thy servant smote both the lion and the bear, and this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he has defied the armies of the living God.
And David said, Jehovah who delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the paw of the bear, he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said to David, Go, and Jehovah shall be with thee.
And Saul clad David with his apparel, and he put a helmet of brass upon his head, and he clad him with a coat of mail.
And David girded his sword upon his apparel, and he attempted to go, for he had not tested them. And David said to Saul, I cannot go with these, for I have not tested them. And David put them off of him.
And he took his staff in his hand, and chose for him five smooth stones out of the brook, and put them in the shepherd's bag which he had, even in his wallet. And his sling was in his hand, and he drew near to the Philistine.
And the Philistine came on and drew near to David, and the man who bore the shield went before him.
And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he disdained him, for he was but a youth, and ruddy, and of a fair countenance.
And the Philistine said to David, Am I a dog, that thou come to me with sticks? And the Philistine cursed David by his gods.
And the Philistine said to David, Come to me, and I will give thy flesh to the birds of the heavens, and to the beasts of the field.
Then David said to the Philistine, Thou come to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a javelin, but I come to thee in the name of Jehovah of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou have defied.
This day Jehovah will deliver thee into my hand, and I will smite thee, and take thy head from off thee. And I will give the dead bodies of the armies of the Philistines this day to the birds of the heavens, and to the wild beasts of the earth, that all the earth may know that there is a God in Israel,
and that all this assembly may know that Jehovah saves not with sword and spear. For the battle is Jehovah's, and he will give you into our hand.
And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose, and came and drew near to meet David, that David hastened, and ran toward the army to meet the Philistine.
And David put his hand in his bag, and took from there a stone, and slung it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead. And the stone sank into his forehead, and he fell upon his face to the earth.
So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a stone, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. But there was no sword in the hand of David.
Then David ran, and stood over the Philistine, and took his sword, and drew it out of the sheath of it, and killed him, and cut off his head with it. And when the Philistines saw that their champion was dead, they fled.
And the men of Israel and of Judah arose, and shouted, and pursued the Philistines until thou come to Gai, and to the gates of Ekron. And the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim, even to Gath, and to Ekron.
And the sons of Israel returned from chasing after the Philistines, and they plundered their camp.
And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to Jerusalem, but he put his armor in his tent.
And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine, he said to Abner, the captain of the army, Abner, whose son is this youth? And Abner said, As thy soul lives, O king, I cannot tell.
And the king said, Inquire thou whose son the stripling is.
And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, Abner took him, and brought him before Saul with the head of the Philistine in his hand.
And Saul said to him, Whose son are thou, young man? And David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite.

And it came to pass, when he had made an end of speaking to Saul, that the soul of Jonathan was knit with the soul of David, and Jonathan loved him as his own soul.
And Saul took him that day, and would no more let him go home to his father's house.
Then Jonathan and David made a covenant, because he loved him as his own soul.
And Jonathan stripped himself of the robe that was upon him, and gave it to David, and his apparel, even to his sword, and to his bow, and to his belt.
And David went out wherever Saul sent him, and behaved himself wisely. And Saul set him over the men of war, and it was good in the sight of all the people, and also in the sight of Saul's servants.
And it came to pass as they came, when David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine, that the women came out of all the cities of Israel, singing and dancing, to meet king Saul, with timbrels, with joy, and with instruments of music.
And the women sang one to another as they played, and said, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands.
And Saul was very angry, and this saying displeased him, and he said, They have ascribed to David ten thousands, and to me they have ascribed but thousands, and what can he have more but the kingdom?
And Saul eyed David from that day and forward.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that an evil spirit from God came mightily upon Saul, and he prophesied in the midst of the house. And David played with his hand, as he did day by day, and Saul had his spear in his hand.
And Saul cast the spear, for he said, I will smite David even to the wall. And David turned away from his presence twice.
And Saul was afraid of David because Jehovah was with him, and was departed from Saul.
Therefore Saul removed him from him, and made him his captain over a thousand, and he went out and came in before the people.
And David behaved himself wisely in all his ways, and Jehovah was with him.
And when Saul saw that he behaved himself very wisely, he was afraid of him.
But all Israel and Judah loved David, for he went out and came in before them.
And Saul said to David, Behold, my elder daughter Merab, I will give her to thee for a wife. Only be thou valiant for me, and fight Jehovah's battles. For Saul said, Let not my hand be upon him, but let the hand of the Philistines be upon him.
And David said to Saul, Who am I, and what is my life, or my father's family in Israel, that I should be son-in-law to the king?
But it came to pass at the time when Merab, Saul's daughter, should have been given to David, that she was given to Adriel the Meholathite to wife.
And Michal, Saul's daughter, loved David, and they told Saul, and the thing pleased him.
And Saul said, I will give him her, that she may be a snare to him, and that the hand of the Philistines may be against him. Therefore Saul said to David, Thou shall this day be my son-in-law a second time.
And Saul commanded his servants, saying, Converse with David secretly, and say, Behold, the king has delight in thee, and all his servants love thee. Now therefore be the king's son-in-law.
And Saul's servants spoke those words in the ears of David. And David said, Does it seem to you a light thing to be the king's son-in-law, seeing that I am a poor man, and lightly esteemed?
And the servants of Saul told him, saying, On this manner David spoke.
And Saul said, Thus shall ye say to David, The king does not desire any dowry, but a hundred foreskins of the Philistines, to be avenged of the king's enemies. Now Saul thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines.
And when his servants told David these words, it pleased David well to be the king's son-in-law. And the days were not expired.
And David arose and went, he and his men, and killed of the Philistines two hundred men. And David brought their foreskins, and they gave them in full number to the king, that he might be the king's son-in-law. And Saul gave him Michal his daughter to wife.
And Saul saw and knew that Jehovah was with David, and Michal, Saul's daughter, loved him.
And Saul was yet the more afraid of David, and Saul was David's enemy continually.
Then the rulers of the Philistines went forth, and it came to pass, as often as they went forth, that David behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul, so that his name was very precious.

And Saul spoke to Jonathan his son, and to all his servants, that they should kill David. But Jonathan, Saul's son, delighted much in David.
And Jonathan told David, saying, Saul my father seeks to kill thee. Now therefore, I pray thee, take heed to thyself in the morning, and abide in a secret place, and hide thyself.
And I will go out and stand beside my father in the field where thou are, and I will converse with my father of thee, and if I see anything, I will tell thee.
And Jonathan spoke good of David to Saul his father, and said to him, Let not the king sin against his servant, against David, because he has not sinned against thee, and because his works have been very good toward thee.
For he put his life in his hand, and smote the Philistine, and Jehovah wrought a great victory for all Israel. Thou saw it, and rejoiced. Why then will thou sin against innocent blood, to kill David without a cause?
And Saul hearkened to the voice of Jonathan. And Saul swore, As Jehovah lives, he shall not be put to death.
And Jonathan called David, and Jonathan showed him all those things. And Jonathan brought David to Saul, and he was in his presence as beforetime.
And there was war again. And David went out, and fought with the Philistines, and killed them with a great slaughter, and they fled before him.
And an evil spirit from Jehovah was upon Saul as he sat in his house with his spear in his hand, and David was playing with his hand.
And Saul sought to smite David even to the wall with the spear, but he slipped away out of Saul's presence, and he smote the spear into the wall. And David fled, and escaped that night.
And Saul sent messengers to David's house, to watch him, and to kill him in the morning. And Michal, David's wife, told him, saying, If thou save not thy life tonight, tomorrow thou will be slain.
So Michal let David down through the window, and he went, and fled, and escaped.
And Michal took the teraphim, and laid it in the bed, and put a pillow of goats' hair at the head of it, and covered it with the clothes.
And when Saul sent messengers to take David, she said, He is sick.
And Saul sent the messengers to see David, saying, Bring him up to me in the bed, that I may kill him.
And when the messengers came in, behold, the teraphim was in the bed, with the pillow of goats' hair at the head of it.
And Saul said to Michal, Why have thou deceived me thus, and let my enemy go, so that he is escaped? And Michal answered Saul, He said to me, Let me go. Why should I kill thee?
Now David fled, and escaped, and came to Samuel to Ramah, and told him all that Saul had done to him. And he and Samuel went and dwelt in Naioth.
And it was told Saul, saying, Behold, David is at Naioth in Ramah.
And Saul sent messengers to take David. And when they saw the company of the prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as head over them, the Spirit of God came upon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied.
And when it was told Saul, he sent other messengers, and they also prophesied. And Saul sent messengers again the third time, and they also prophesied.
Then he also went to Ramah, and came to the great well that is in Secu. And he asked and said, Where are Samuel and David? And one said, Behold, they are at Naioth in Ramah.
And he went there to Naioth in Ramah, and the Spirit of God came upon him also, and he went on, and prophesied until he came to Naioth in Ramah.
And he also stripped off his clothes, and he also prophesied before Samuel, and lay down naked all that day and all that night. Therefore they say, Is Saul also among the prophets?

And David fled from Naioth in Ramah, and came and said before Jonathan, What have I done? What is my iniquity, and what is my sin before thy father, that he seeks my life?
And he said to him, Far from it. Thou shall not die. Behold, my father does nothing either great or small, but that he discloses it to me, and why should my father hide this thing from me? It is not so.
And David swore moreover, and said, Thy father knows well that I have found favor in thine eyes, and he says, Let not Jonathan know this, lest he be grieved. But truly as Jehovah lives, and as thy soul lives, there is but a step between me and death.
Then Jonathan said to David, Whatever thy soul desires, I will even do it for thee.
And David said to Jonathan, Behold, tomorrow is the new moon, and I should not fail to sit with the king to eat. But let me go that I may hide myself in the field to the third day at evening.
If thy father misses me at all, then say, David earnestly asked leave of me that he might run to Bethlehem his city, for it is the yearly sacrifice there for all the family.
If he says thus, It is well. Thy servant shall have peace. But if he is angry, then know that evil is determined by him.
Therefore deal kindly with thy servant, for thou have brought thy servant into a covenant of Jehovah with thee. But if there be in me iniquity, kill me thyself, for why should thou bring me to thy father?
And Jonathan said, Far be it from thee, for if I should at all know that evil were determined by my father to come upon thee, then would I not tell it to thee?
Then David said to Jonathan, Who shall tell me if perchance thy father answers thee roughly?
And Jonathan said to David, Come, and let us go out into the field. And they went out both of them into the field.
And Jonathan said to David, Jehovah, the God of Israel-when I have sounded my father about this time tomorrow, or the third day, behold, if there be good toward David, shall I not then send to thee, and disclose it to thee?
Jehovah do so to Jonathan, and more also, should it please my father to do thee evil, if I not disclose it to thee, and send thee away that thou may go in peace. And Jehovah be with thee as he has been with my father.
And thou shall not only show me the loving kindness of Jehovah, while I yet live, that I not die,
but also thou shall not cut off thy kindness from my house forever. No, not when Jehovah has cut off the enemies of David every one from the face of the earth.
So Jonathan made a covenant with the house of David, saying, And Jehovah will require it at the hand of David's enemies.
And Jonathan caused David to swear again, for the love that he had to him. For he loved him as he loved his own soul.
Then Jonathan said to him, Tomorrow is the new moon, and thou will be missed because thy seat will be empty.
And when thou have stayed three days, thou shall go down quickly, and come to the place where thou hid thyself when the business was in hand, and shall remain by the stone Ezel.
And I will shoot three arrows on the side of it, as though I shot at a mark.
And, behold, I will send the lad, saying, Go, find the arrows. If I say to the lad, Behold, the arrows are on this side of thee, take them, and come, for there is peace to thee and no hurt, as Jehovah lives.
But if I say thus to the boy, Behold, the arrows are beyond thee, go thy way, for Jehovah has sent thee away.
And concerning the matter which thou and I have spoken of, behold, Jehovah is between thee and me forever.
So David hid himself in the field. And when the new moon came, the king sat down to eat food.
And the king sat upon his seat, as at other times, even upon the seat by the wall, and Jonathan stood up, and Abner sat by Saul's side, but David's place was empty.
Nevertheless Saul spoke nothing that day, for he thought, Something has befallen him. He is not clean. Surely he is not clean.
And it came to pass on the morrow after the new moon, which was the second day, that David's place was empty. And Saul said to Jonathan his son, Why has the son of Jesse not come in to the food, neither yesterday, nor today?
And Jonathan answered Saul, David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem.
And he said, Let me go, I pray thee, for our family has a sacrifice in the city, and my brother, he has commanded me. And now, if I have found favor in thine eyes, let me get away, I pray thee, and see my brothers. Therefore he has not come to the king's table.
Then Saul's anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said to him, Thou son of a perverse rebellious woman, do I not know that thou have chosen the son of Jesse to thine own shame, and to the shame of thy mother's nakedness?
For as long as the son of Jesse lives upon the ground, thou shall not be established, nor thy kingdom. Therefore now send and fetch him to me, for he shall surely die.
And Jonathan answered Saul his father, and said to him, Why should he be put to death? What has he done?
And Saul cast his spear at him to smite him. By this Jonathan knew that it was determined by his father to put David to death.
So Jonathan arose from the table in fierce anger, and ate no food the second day of the month, for he was grieved for David because his father had done him shame.
And it came to pass in the morning, that Jonathan went out into the field at the time appointed with David, and a little lad with him.
And he said to his lad, Run, now find the arrows which I shoot. And as the lad ran, he shot an arrow beyond him.
And when the lad was come to the place of the arrow which Jonathan had shot, Jonathan cried after the lad, and said, Is not the arrow beyond thee?
And Jonathan cried after the lad, Make speed, haste, stay not. And Jonathan's lad gathered up the arrows, and came to his master.
But the lad knew nothing. Only Jonathan and David knew the matter.
And Jonathan gave his weapons to his lad, and said to him, Go, carry them to the city.
And as soon as the lad was gone, David arose out of a place toward the South, and fell on his face to the ground, and bowed himself three times. And they kissed each other, and wept one with another until David surpassed him.
And Jonathan said to David, Go in peace, inasmuch as we have sworn both of us in the name of Jehovah, saying, Jehovah shall be between me and thee, and between my seed and thy seed, forever. And he arose and departed, and Jonathan went into the city.

Then David came to Nob to Ahimelech the priest. And Ahimelech came to meet David trembling, and said to him, Why are thou alone, and no man with thee?
And David said to Ahimelech the priest, The king has commanded me a business, and has said to me, Let no man know anything of the business about which I send thee, and what I have commanded thee, and I have assigned the young men to such and such a place.
Now therefore what is under thy hand? Give me five loaves of bread in my hand, or whatever there is present.
And the priest answered David, and said, There is no common bread under my hand, but there is holy bread. If only the young men have kept themselves from women.
And David answered the priest, and said to him, Of a truth women have been kept from us about these three days. When I came out the vessels of the young men were holy, though it was but a common journey. How much more then today shall their vessels be holy?
So the priest gave him holy bread, for there was no bread there but the showbread that was taken from before Jehovah to put hot bread in the day when it was taken away.
Now a certain man of the servants of Saul was there that day, detained before Jehovah. And his name was Doeg the Edomite, the foremost of the herdsmen who belonged to Saul.
And David said to Ahimelech, And is there not here under thy hand spear or sword? For I have neither brought my sword nor my weapons with me, because the king's business required haste.
And the priest said, The sword of Goliath the Philistine, whom thou killed in the vale of Elah, behold, it is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod. If thou will take that, take it, for there is no other except that here. And David said, There is none like that. Give it to me.
And David arose, and fled that day for fear of Saul, and went to Achish the king of Gath.
And the servants of Achish said to him, Is not this David the king of the land? Did they not sing one to another of him in dances, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands?
And David laid up these words in his heart, and was very afraid of Achish the king of Gath.
And he changed his behavior before them, and feigned himself mad in their hands, and scrabbled on the doors of the gate, and let his spittle fall down upon his beard.
Then Achish said to his servants, Lo, ye see the man is mad. Why then have ye brought him to me?
Do I lack madmen, that ye have brought this fellow to play the madman in my presence? Shall this fellow come into my house?

David therefore departed from there, and escaped to the cave of Adullam. And when his brothers and all his father's house heard it, they went down there to him.
And every man who was in distress, and every man who was in debt, and every man who was discontented, gathered themselves to him, and he became captain over them. And there were with him about four hundred men.
And David went from there to Mizpeh of Moab, and he said to the king of Moab, Let my father and my mother, I pray thee, come forth, and be with you, till I know what God will do for me.
And he brought them before the king of Moab, and they dwelt with him all the while that David was in the stronghold.
And the prophet Gad said to David, Abide not in the stronghold. Depart, and get thee into the land of Judah. Then David departed, and came into the forest of Hereth.
And Saul heard that David was discovered, and the men who were with him. Now Saul was sitting in Gibeah, under the tamarisk tree in Ramah with his spear in his hand, and all his servants were standing about him.
And Saul said to his servants who stood about him, Hear now, ye Benjamites. Will the son of Jesse give every one of you fields and vineyards? Will he make you all captains of thousands and captains of hundreds,
that all of you have conspired against me, and there is none who discloses to me when my son makes a league with the son of Jesse? And there is none of you who is sorry for me, or discloses to me that my son has stirred up my servant against me, to lie in wait, as at this day.
Then answered Doeg the Edomite, who stood by the servants of Saul, and said, I saw the son of Jesse coming to Nob, to Ahimelech the son of Ahitub.
And he inquired of Jehovah for him, and gave him food, and gave him the sword of Goliath the Philistine.
Then the king sent to call Ahimelech the priest, the son of Ahitub, and all his father's house, the priests who were in Nob. And they came to the king, all of them.
And Saul said, Hear now, thou son of Ahitub. And he answered, Here I am, my lord.
And Saul said to him, Why have ye conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, in that thou have given him bread, and a sword, and have inquired of God for him, that he should rise against me to lie in wait as at this day?
Then Ahimelech answered the king, and said, And who among all thy servants is so faithful as David, who is the king's son-in-law, and is taken into thy council, and is honorable in thy house?
Have I today begun to inquire of God for him? Be it far from me. Let not the king impute anything to his servant, nor to all the house of my father, for thy servant knows nothing of all this, less or more.
And the king said, Thou shall surely die, Ahimelech, thou, and all thy father's house.
And the king said to the guard who stood about him, Turn, and kill the priests of Jehovah, because their hand also is with David, and because they knew that he fled, and did not disclose it to me. But the servants of the king would not put forth their hand to fall upon the priests of Jehovah.
And the king said to Doeg, Turn thou, and fall upon the priests. And Doeg the Edomite turned, and he fell upon the priests, and he killed on that day eighty-five persons who wore a linen ephod.
And Nob, the city of the priests, he smote with the edge of the sword, both men and women, sons and sucklings, and oxen and donkeys and sheep, with the edge of the sword.
And one of the sons of Ahimelech, the son of Ahitub, named Abiathar, escaped, and fled after David.
And Abiathar told David that Saul had slain Jehovah's priests.
And David said to Abiathar, I knew on that day, when Doeg the Edomite was there, that he would surely tell Saul. I have occasioned the death of all the persons of thy father's house.
Abide thou with me. Fear not, for he who seeks my life seeks thy life, for with me thou shall be in safeguard.

And they told David, saying, Behold, the Philistines are fighting against Keilah, and are robbing the threshing-floors.
Therefore David inquired of Jehovah, saying, Shall I go and smite these Philistines? And Jehovah said to David, Go, and smite the Philistines, and save Keilah.
And David's men said to him, Behold, we are afraid here in Judah. How much more then if we go to Keilah against the armies of the Philistines?
Then David inquired of Jehovah yet again. And Jehovah answered him, and said, Arise, go down to Keilah, for I will deliver the Philistines into thy hand.
And David and his men went to Keilah, and fought with the Philistines, and brought away their cattle, and killed them with a great slaughter. So David saved the inhabitants of Keilah.
And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David to Keilah, that he came down with an ephod in his hand.
And it was told Saul that David came to Keilah. And Saul said, God has delivered him into my hand, for he is shut in by entering into a town that has gates and bars.
And Saul summoned all the people to war, to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men.
And David knew that Saul was devising mischief against him, and he said to Abiathar the priest, Bring here the ephod.
Then said David, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, thy servant has surely heard that Saul seeks to come to Keilah to destroy the city for my sake.
Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hand? Will Saul come down as thy servant has heard? O Jehovah, the God of Israel, I beseech thee, tell thy servant. And Jehovah said, He will come down.
Then David said, Will the men of Keilah deliver up me and my men into the hand of Saul? And Jehovah said, They will deliver thee up.
Then David and his men, who were about six hundred, arose and departed out of Keilah, and went wherever they could go. And it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah, and he ceased to go forth.
And David abode in the wilderness in the strongholds, and remained in the hill-country in the wilderness of Ziph. And Saul sought him every day, but God did not deliver him into his hand.
And David saw that Saul came out to seek his life, and David was in the wilderness of Ziph in the forest.
And Jonathan, Saul's son, arose, and went to David into the forest, and strengthened his hand in God.
And he said to him, Fear not, for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee. And thou shall be king over Israel, and I shall be next to thee. And that, Saul my father also knows.
And those two made a covenant before Jehovah. And David abode in the forest, and Jonathan went to his house.
Then the Ziphites came up to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Does not David hide himself with us in the strongholds in the forest, in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of the desert?
Now therefore, O king, come down, according to all the desire of thy soul to come down, and our part shall be to deliver him up into the king's hand.
And Saul said, Blessed be ye of Jehovah, for ye have had compassion on me.
Go, I pray you, make yet more sure, and know and see his place where his haunt is, and who has seen him there, for it is told me that he deals very shrewdly.
See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking-places where he hides himself, and come ye again to me of a certainty. And I will go with you, and it shall come to pass, if he is in the land, that I will search him out among all the thousands of Judah.
And they arose, and went to Ziph before Saul, but David and his men were in the wilderness of Maon, in the Arabah on the south of the desert.
And Saul and his men went to seek him. And they told David. Therefore he came down to the rock, and abode in the wilderness of Maon. And when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the wilderness of Maon.
And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on that side of the mountain. And David made haste to get away for fear of Saul. For Saul and his men encompassed David and his men round about to take them.
But there came a messenger to Saul, saying, Hasten thee, and come, for the Philistines have made a raid upon the land.
So Saul returned from pursuing after David, and went against the Philistines. Therefore they called that place Sela-hammahlekoth.
And David went up from there, and dwelt in the strongholds of En-gedi.

And it came to pass, when Saul was returned from following the Philistines, that it was told him, saying, Behold, David is in the wilderness of En-gedi.
Then Saul took three thousand chosen men out of all Israel, and went to seek David and his men upon the rocks of the wild goats.
And he came to the sheepcotes by the way, where was a cave, and Saul went in to cover his feet. Now David and his men were abiding in the innermost parts of the cave.
And the men of David said to him, Behold, the day of which Jehovah said to thee, Behold, I will deliver thine enemy into thy hand, and thou shall do to him as it shall seem good to thee. Then David arose, and cut off the skirt of Saul's robe secretly.
And it came to pass afterward, that David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt.
And he said to his men, Jehovah forbid that I should do this thing to my lord, Jehovah's anointed, to put forth my hand against him, since he is Jehovah's anointed.
So David restrained his men with these words, and did not allow them to rise against Saul. And Saul rose up out of the cave, and went on his way.
David also arose afterward, and went out of the cave, and cried after Saul, saying, My lord the king. And when Saul looked behind him, David bowed with his face to the earth, and did obeisance.
And David said to Saul, Why do thou hearken to men's words, saying, Behold, David seeks thy hurt?
Behold, this day thine eyes have seen how that Jehovah had delivered thee today into my hand in the cave. And some bade me kill thee, but I spared thee. And I said, I will not put forth my hand against my lord, for he is Jehovah's anointed.
Moreover, my father, see, yea, see the skirt of thy robe in my hand, for in that I cut off the skirt of thy robe, and killed thee not. Know thou and see that there is neither evil nor transgression in my hand, and I have not sinned against thee, though thou hunt after my life to take it.
Jehovah judge between me and thee, and Jehovah avenge me of thee, but my hand shall not be upon thee.
As says the proverb of the ancients, Out of the wicked comes forth wickedness, but my hand shall not be upon thee.
After whom is the king of Israel come out? After whom do thou pursue? After a dead dog, after a flea.
Jehovah therefore be judge, and give sentence between me and thee, and see, and plead my cause, and deliver me out of thy hand.
And it came to pass, when David had made an end of speaking these words to Saul, that Saul said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And Saul lifted up his voice, and wept.
And he said to David, Thou are more righteous than I, for thou have rendered to me good, whereas I have rendered to thee evil.
And thou have declared this day how that thou have dealt well with me, inasmuch as when Jehovah had delivered me up into thy hand, thou killed me not.
For if a man finds his enemy, will he let him go away well? Therefore Jehovah reward thee good for that which thou have done to me this day.
And now, behold, I know that thou shall surely be king, and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thy hand.
Swear now therefore to me by Jehovah, that thou will not cut off my seed after me, and that thou will not destroy my name out of my father's house.
And David swore to Saul. And Saul went home, but David and his men got up to the stronghold.

And Samuel died. And all Israel gathered themselves together, and lamented him, and buried him in his house at Ramah. And David arose, and went down to the wilderness of Paran.
And there was a man in Maon whose possessions were in Carmel. And the man was very great in goods, and he had three thousand sheep, and a thousand goats. And he was shearing his sheep in Carmel.
Now the name of the man was Nabal, and the name of his wife Abigail. And the woman was of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance, but the man was churlish and evil in his doings, and he was of the house of Caleb.
And David heard in the wilderness that Nabal was shearing his sheep.
And David sent ten young men, and David said to the young men, Get you up to Carmel, and go to Nabal, and greet him in my name.
And thus ye shall say to him who lives in prosperity, Peace be to thee, and peace be to thy house, and peace be to all that thou have.
And now I have heard that thou have shearers. Thy shepherds have now been with us, and we did them no hurt, neither was there anything missing to them all the while they were in Carmel.
Ask thy young men, and they will tell thee. Therefore let the young men find favor in thine eyes, for we come in a good day. Give, I pray thee, whatever comes to thy hand to thy servants, and to thy son David.
And when David's young men came, they spoke to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, and ceased.
And Nabal answered David's servants, and said, Who is David? And who is the son of Jesse? There are many servants now-a-days who break away every man from his master.
Shall I then take my bread, and my water, and my flesh that I have killed for my shearers, and give it to men of whom I know not from where they are?
So David's young men turned on their way, and went back, and came and told him according to all these words.
And David said to his men, Gird ye on every man his sword. And they girded on every man his sword, and David also girded on his sword. And there went up after David about four hundred men, and two hundred abode by the baggage.
But one of the young men told Abigail, Nabal's wife, saying, Behold, David sent messengers out of the wilderness to salute our master, and he railed at them.
But the men were very good to us, and we were not hurt, neither did we miss anything as long as we went with them when we were in the fields.
They were a wall to us both by night and by day all the while we were with them keeping the sheep.
Now therefore know and consider what thou will do, for evil is determined against our master, and against all his house. For he is such a worthless fellow that a man cannot speak to him.
Then Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched grain, and a hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid them on donkeys.
And she said to her young men, Go on before me, behold, I come after you. But she did not tell her husband Nabal.
And it was so, as she rode on her donkey, and came down by the covert of the mountain, that, behold, David and his men came down toward her, and she met them.
Now David had said, Surely in vain have I kept all that this fellow has in the wilderness so that nothing was missed of all that pertained to him, and he has returned me evil for good.
God do so to the enemies of David, and more also, if I leave of all that pertains to him by the morning light so much as one man-child.
And when Abigail saw David, she hastened, and alighted from her donkey, and fell before David on her face, and bowed herself to the ground.
And she fell at his feet, and said, Upon me, my lord, upon me be the iniquity, and let thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak in thine ears, and hear thou the words of thy handmaid.
Let not my lord, I pray thee, regard this worthless fellow, even Nabal, for as his name is, so is he. Nabal is his name, and folly is with him. But I thy handmaid saw not the young men of my lord whom thou sent.
Now therefore, my lord, as Jehovah lives, and as thy soul lives, since Jehovah has withheld thee from blood guiltiness, and from avenging thyself with thine own hand, now therefore let thine enemies, and those who seek evil to my lord, be as Nabal.
And now this present which thy servant has brought to my lord, let it be given to the young men who follow my lord.
Forgive, I pray thee, the trespass of thy handmaid. For Jehovah will certainly make my lord a sure house, because my lord fights the battles of Jehovah, and evil shall not be found in thee all thy days.
And though men be risen up to pursue thee, and to seek thy soul, yet the soul of my lord shall be bound in the bundle of life with Jehovah thy God. And the souls of thine enemies, them he shall sling out as from the hollow of a sling.
And it shall come to pass, when Jehovah shall have done to my lord according to all the good that he has spoken concerning thee, and shall have appointed thee prince over Israel,
that this shall be no grief to thee, nor offense of heart to my lord, either that thou have shed blood without cause, or that my lord has avenged himself. And when Jehovah shall have dealt well with my lord, then remember thy handmaid.
And David said to Abigail, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me,
and blessed be thy discretion, and blessed be thou, who have kept me this day from blood guiltiness, and from avenging myself with my own hand.
For in very deed, as Jehovah, the God of Israel, lives, who has withheld me from hurting thee, unless thou had hastened and come to meet me, surely there had not been left to Nabal by the morning light so much as one man-child.
So David received from her hand that which she had brought him. And he said to her, Go up in peace to thy house. See, I have hearkened to thy voice, and have accepted thy person.
And Abigail came to Nabal, and, behold, he held a feast in his house like the feast of a king. And Nabal's heart was merry within him, for he was very drunk. Therefore she told him nothing, less or more, until the morning light.
And it came to pass in the morning, when the wine was gone out of Nabal, that his wife told him these things, and his heart died within him, and he became as a stone.
And it came to pass about ten days after, that Jehovah smote Nabal, so that he died.
And when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has pleaded the cause of my reproach from the hand of Nabal, and has kept back his servant from evil, and the evil-doing of Nabal Jehovah has returned upon his own head. And David sent and spoke concerning Abigail, to take her to him to wife.
And when the servants of David came to Abigail to Carmel, they spoke to her, saying, David has sent us to thee, to take thee to him to wife.
And she arose, and bowed herself with her face to the earth, and said, Behold, thy handmaid is a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my lord.
And Abigail hastened, and arose, and rode upon a donkey, with five of her damsels who followed her. And she went after the messengers of David, and became his wife.
David also took Ahinoam of Jezreel, and they became his wives, both of them.
Now Saul had given Michal his daughter, David's wife, to Palti the son of Laish, who was of Gallim.

And the Ziphites came to Saul to Gibeah, saying, Does not David hide himself in the hill of Hachilah, which is before the desert?
Then Saul arose, and went down to the wilderness of Ziph, having three thousand chosen men of Israel with him, to seek David in the wilderness of Ziph.
And Saul encamped in the hill of Hachilah, which is before the desert by the way. But David abode in the wilderness, and he saw that Saul came after him into the wilderness.
David therefore sent out spies, and understood that Saul definitely came.
And David arose, and came to the place where Saul had encamped. And David beheld the place where Saul lay, and Abner the son of Ner, the captain of his army. And Saul lay within the place of the wagons, and the people were encamped around about him.
Then David answered and said to Ahimelech the Hittite, and to Abishai the son of Zeruiah, brother to Joab, saying, Who will go down with me to Saul to the camp? And Abishai said, I will go down with thee.
So David and Abishai came to the people by night. And, behold, Saul lay sleeping within the place of the wagons with his spear stuck in the ground at his head, and Abner and the people lay round about him.
Then said Abishai to David, God has delivered up thine enemy into thy hand this day. Now therefore let me smite him, I pray thee, with the spear to the earth at one stroke, and I will not smite him the second time.
And David said to Abishai, Destroy him not, for who can put forth his hand against Jehovah's anointed, and be guiltless?
And David said, As Jehovah lives, Jehovah will smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall go down into battle and perish.
Jehovah forbid that I should put forth my hand against Jehovah's anointed. But now take, I pray thee, the spear that is at his head, and the cruse of water, and let us go.
So David took the spear and the cruse of water from Saul's head, and they got away. And no man saw it, nor knew it, neither did any awake, for they were all asleep, because a deep sleep from Jehovah was fallen upon them.
Then David went over to the other side, and stood on the top of the mountain afar off, a great space being between them.
And David cried out to the people, and to Abner the son of Ner, saying, Answer thou not, Abner? Then Abner answered and said, Who are thou that cries to the king?
And David said to Abner, Are not thou a valiant man? And who is like to thee in Israel? Why then have thou not kept watch over thy lord the king? For there came one of the people in to destroy the king thy lord.
This thing is not good that thou have done. As Jehovah lives, ye are worthy to die because ye have not kept watch over your lord, Jehovah's anointed. And now see where the king's spear is, and the cruse of water that was at his head.
And Saul knew David's voice, and said, Is this thy voice, my son David? And David said, It is my voice, my lord, O king.
And he said, Why does my lord pursue after his servant? For what have I done? Or what evil is in my hand?
Now therefore, I pray thee, let my lord the king hear the words of his servant. If it be Jehovah who has stirred thee up against me, let him accept an offering, but if it be the sons of men, cursed be they before Jehovah. For they have driven me out this day that I should not cling to the inheritance of Jehovah, saying, Go, serve other gods.
Now therefore, let not my blood fall to the earth away from the presence of Jehovah. For the king of Israel has come out to seek a flea, as when a man hunts a partridge in the mountains.
Then Saul said, I have sinned. Return, my son David, for I will no more do thee harm because my life was precious in thine eyes this day. Behold, I have played the fool, and have erred exceedingly.
And David answered and said, Behold the spear, O king! Let then one of the young men come over and fetch it.
And Jehovah will render to every man his righteousness and his faithfulness, inasmuch as Jehovah delivered thee into my hand today, and I would not put forth my hand against Jehovah's anointed.
And, behold, as thy life was much set by this day in my eyes, so let my life be much set by in the eyes of Jehovah, and let him deliver me out of all tribulation.
Then Saul said to David, Blessed be thou, my son David. Thou shall both do mightily, and shall surely prevail. So David went his way, and Saul returned to his place.

And David said in his heart, I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul. There is nothing better for me than that I should escape into the land of the Philistines, and Saul will despair of me, to seek me any more in all the borders of Israel, so I shall escape out of his hand.
And David arose, and passed over, he and the six hundred men who were with him, to Achish the son of Maoch, king of Gath.
And David dwelt with Achish at Gath, he and his men, every man with his household, even David with his two wives, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the Carmelitess, Nabal's wife.
And it was told Saul that David was fled to Gath, and he sought no more again for him.
And David said to Achish, If now I have found favor in thine eyes, let them give me a place in one of the cities in the country that I may dwell there, for why should thy servant dwell in the royal city with thee?
Then Achish gave him Ziklag that day. Therefore Ziklag pertains to the kings of Judah to this day.
And the number of the days that David dwelt in the country of the Philistines was a full year and four months.
And David and his men went up, and made a raid upon the Geshurites, and the Girzites, and the Amalekites, for those nations were the inhabitants of the land, who were of old as thou go to Shur, even to the land of Egypt.
And David smote the land, and saved neither man nor woman alive, and took away the sheep, and the oxen, and the donkeys, and the camels, and the apparel, and he returned, and came to Achish.
And Achish said, Against whom have ye made a raid today? And David said, Against the South of Judah, and against the South of the Jerahmeelites, and against the South of the Kenites.
And David saved neither man nor woman alive to bring them to Gath, saying, Lest they should tell of us, saying, So did David, and so has been his manner all the while he has dwelt in the country of the Philistines.
And Achish believed David, saying, He has made his people Israel utterly to abhor him. Therefore he shall be my servant forever.

And it came to pass in those days, that the Philistines gathered their armies together for warfare to fight with Israel. And Achish said to David, Know thou assuredly, that thou shall go out with me in the army, thou and thy men.
And David said to Achish, Therefore thou shall know what thy servant will do. And Achish said to David, Therefore I will make thee my chief bodyguard forever.
Now Samuel was dead, and all Israel had lamented him, and buried him in Ramah, even in his own city. And Saul had put away those who had familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land.
And the Philistines gathered themselves together, and came and encamped in Shunem. And Saul gathered all Israel together, and they encamped in Gilboa.
And when Saul saw the army of the Philistines, he was afraid, and his heart trembled greatly.
And when Saul inquired of Jehovah, Jehovah answered him not, neither by dreams, nor by Urim, nor by prophets.
Then Saul said to his servants, Seek me a woman who has a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and inquire of her. And his servants said to him, Behold, there is a woman who has a familiar spirit at En-dor.
And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment, and went, he and two men with him. And they came to the woman by night, and he said, Divine to me, I pray thee, by the familiar spirit, and bring me up whomever I shall name to thee.
And the woman said to him, Behold, thou know what Saul has done, how he has cut off those who have familiar spirits, and the wizards, out of the land. Why then do thou lay a snare for my life, to cause me to die?
And Saul swore to her by Jehovah, saying, As Jehovah lives, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this thing.
Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up to thee? And he said, Bring me up Samuel.
And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice. And the woman spoke to Saul, saying, Why have thou deceived me? For thou are Saul.
And the king said to her, Be not afraid, for what do thou see? And the woman said to Saul, I see a god coming up out of the earth.
And he said to her, What form is he of? And she said, An old man comes up, and he is covered with a robe. And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he bowed with his face to the ground, and did obeisance.
And Samuel said to Saul, Why have thou disquieted me, to bring me up? And Saul answered, I am greatly distressed, for the Philistines make war against me, and God is departed from me, and answers me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams. Therefore I have called thee, that thou may make known to me what I shall do.
And Samuel said, Why then do thou ask of me, since Jehovah departed from thee, and has become thine adversary?
And Jehovah has done to thee, as he spoke by me. And Jehovah has torn the kingdom out of thy hand, and given it to thy neighbor, even to David.
Because thou obeyed not the voice of Jehovah, and did not execute his fierce wrath upon Amalek, therefore Jehovah has done this thing to thee this day.
Moreover Jehovah will deliver Israel also with thee into the hand of the Philistines, and tomorrow thou and thy sons shall be with me. Jehovah will also deliver the army of Israel into the hand of the Philistines.
Then Saul fell straightaway his full length upon the earth, and was greatly afraid because of the words of Samuel, and there was no strength in him, for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night.
And the woman came to Saul, and saw that he was greatly troubled, and said to him, Behold, thy handmaid has hearkened to thy voice, and I have put my life in my hand, and have hearkened to thy words which thou spoke to me.
Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also to the voice of thy handmaid, and let me set a morsel of bread before thee, and eat, that thou may have strength when thou go on thy way.
But he refused, and said, I will not eat. But his servants, together with the woman, constrained him, and he hearkened to their voice. So he arose from the ground, and sat upon the bed.
And the woman had a fatted calf in the house. And she hastened, and killed it, and she took flour, and kneaded it, and baked unleavened bread of it.
And she brought it before Saul, and before his servants, and they ate. Then they rose up, and went away that night.

Now the Philistines gathered together all their armies to Aphek, and the Israelites encamped by the fountain which is in Jezreel.
And the lords of the Philistines passed on by hundreds, and by thousands, and David and his men passed on in the rearward with Achish.
Then the rulers of the Philistines said, What are these Hebrews? And Achish said to the rulers of the Philistines, Is not this David, the servant of Saul the king of Israel, who has been with me these days, or rather these years, and I have found no fault in him since he fell away to me to this day?
But the rulers of the Philistines were angry with him. And the rulers of the Philistines said to him, Make the man return, that he may go back to his place where thou have appointed him, and let him not go down with us to battle, lest in the battle he become an adversary to us. For with what does this man reconcile himself to his lord? Would it not be with the heads of these men?
Is not this David, of whom they sang one to another in dances, saying, Saul has slain his thousands, And David his ten thousands?
Then Achish called David, and said to him, As Jehovah lives, thou have been upright, and thy going out and thy coming in with me in the army is good in my sight, for I have not found evil in thee since the day of thy coming to me to this day. Nevertheless the lords do not favor thee.
Therefore now return, and go in peace, that thou not displease the lords of the Philistines.
And David said to Achish, But what have I done? And what have thou found in thy servant so long as I have been before thee to this day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my lord the king?
And Achish answered and said to David, I know that thou are good in my sight, as an agent of God, notwithstanding the rulers of the Philistines have said, He shall not go up with us to the battle.
Therefore now rise up early in the morning with the servants of thy lord who have come with thee, and as soon as ye are up early in the morning, and have light, depart.
So David rose up early, he and his men, to depart in the morning, to return into the land of the Philistines. And the Philistines went up to Jezreel.

And it came to pass, when David and his men came to Ziklag on the third day, that the Amalekites had made a raid upon the South, and upon Ziklag, and had smitten Ziklag, and burned it with fire,
and had taken captive the women and all that were in it, both small and great. They did not kill any, but carried them off, and went their way.
And when David and his men came to the city, behold, it was burned with fire. And their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, were taken captive.
Then David and the people who were with him lifted up their voice and wept, until they had no more power to weep.
And David's two wives were taken captive, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
And David was greatly distressed, for the people spoke of stoning him, because the soul of all the people was grieved, every man for his sons and for his daughters. But David strengthened himself in Jehovah his God.
And David said to Abiathar the priest, the son of Ahimelech, I pray thee, bring me here the ephod. And Abiathar brought there the ephod to David.
And David inquired of Jehovah, saying, If I pursue after this troop, shall I overtake them? And he answered him, Pursue, for thou shall surely overtake them, and shall without fail recover all.
So David went, he and the six hundred men who were with him, and came to the brook Besor, where those who were left behind stayed.
But David pursued, he and four hundred men, for two hundred stayed behind, who were so faint that they could not go over the brook Besor.
And they found an Egyptian in the field, and brought him to David, and gave him bread. And he ate, and they gave him water to drink.
And they gave him a piece of a cake of figs, and two clusters of raisins. And when he had eaten, his spirit came again to him, for he had eaten no bread, nor drunk any water, three days and three nights.
And David said to him, To whom do thou belong? And from where are thou? And he said, I am a young man of Egypt, servant to an Amalekite. And my master left me because three days ago I fell sick.
We made a raid upon the South of the Cherethites, and upon that which belongs to Judah, and upon the South of Caleb, and we burned Ziklag with fire.
And David said to him, Will thou bring me down to this troop? And he said, Swear to me by God, that thou will neither kill me, nor deliver me up into the hands of my master, and I will bring thee down to this troop.
And when he had brought him down, behold, they were spread abroad over all the ground, eating and drinking, and dancing, because of all the great spoil that they had taken out of the land of the Philistines, and out of the land of Judah.
And David smote them from the twilight even to the evening of the next day. And there escaped not a man of them, except four hundred young men who rode upon camels and fled.
And David recovered all that the Amalekites had taken, and David rescued his two wives.
And there was nothing lacking to them, neither small nor great, neither sons nor daughters, neither spoil, nor anything that they had taken to them; David brought back all.
And David took all the flocks and the herds, which they drove before those other cattle, and said, This is David's spoil.
And David came to the two hundred men, who were so faint that they could not follow David, whom also they had made to abide at the brook Besor. And they went forth to meet David, and to meet the people who were with him. And when David came near to the people, he saluted them.
Then answered all the wicked men and base fellows of those who went with David, and said, Because they went not with us, we will not give them anything of the spoil that we have recovered except to every man his wife and his children that he may lead them away, and depart.
Then David said, Ye shall not do so, my brothers, with that which Jehovah has given to us, who has preserved us, and delivered the troop that came against us into our hand.
And who will hearken to you in this matter? For as his share is who goes down to the battle so shall his share be who remains by the baggage; they shall share alike.
And it was so from that day forward, that he made it a statute and an ordinance for Israel to this day.
to those who were in Bethel, and to those who were in Ramoth of the South, and to those who were in Jattir,
and to those who were in Aroer, and to those who were in Siphmoth, and to those who were in Eshtemoa,
and to those who were in Racal, and to those who were in the cities of the Jerahmeelites, and to those who were in the cities of the Kenites,
and to those who were in Hormah, and to those who were in Borashan, and to those who were in Athach,
and to those who were in Hebron, and to all the places where David himself and his men were accustomed to frequent.

Now the Philistines fought against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.
And the Philistines followed hard upon Saul and upon his sons, and the Philistines killed Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchishua, the sons of Saul.
And the battle went severely against Saul, and the archers overtook him, and he was greatly distressed because of the archers.
Then Saul said to his armor bearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through with it, lest these uncircumcised come and thrust me through, and abuse me. But his armor bearer would not, for he was very afraid. Therefore Saul took his sword, and fell upon it.
And when his armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon his sword, and died with him.
So Saul died, and his three sons, and his armor bearer, and all his men, that same day together.
And when the men of Israel who were on the other side of the valley, and those who were beyond the Jordan, saw that the men of Israel fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook the cities, and fled. And the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his three sons fallen in mount Gilboa.
And they cut off his head, and stripped off his armor, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about to carry the news to the house of their idols, and to the people.
And they put his armor in the house of the Ashtaroth, and they fastened his body to the wall of Beth-shan.
And when the inhabitants of Jabesh-gilead heard concerning him, that which the Philistines had done to Saul,
all the valiant men arose, and went all night, and took the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons from the wall of Beth-shan, and they came to Jabesh, and burnt them there.
And they took their bones, and buried them under the tamarisk tree in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.

II Samuel

And it came to pass after the death of Saul, when David was returned from the slaughter of the Amalekites, and David had abode two days in Ziklag,
it came to pass on the third day, that, behold, a man came out of the camp from Saul with his clothes torn, and earth upon his head. And so it was, when he came to David, that he fell to the ground, and did obeisance.
And David said to him, From where did thou come? And he said to him, I escaped out of the camp of Israel.
And David said to him, How did the matter go? I pray thee, tell me. And he answered, The people are fled from the battle, and many of the people also are fallen and dead, and Saul and Jonathan his son are also dead.
And David said to the young man who told him, How do thou know that Saul and Jonathan his son are dead?
And the young man who told him said, As I happened by chance upon mount Gilboa, behold, Saul was leaning upon his spear, and, lo, the chariots and the horsemen followed close after him.
And when he looked behind him, he saw me, and called to me. And I answered, Here I am.
And he said to me, Who are thou? And I answered him, I am an Amalekite.
And he said to me, Stand, I pray thee, beside me, and kill me, for anguish has taken hold of me, because my life is yet whole in me.
So I stood beside him and killed him, because I was sure that he could not live after he was fallen. And I took the crown that was upon his head, and the bracelet that was on his arm, and have brought them here to my lord.
Then David took hold on his clothes, and tore them, and likewise all the men who were with him.
And they mourned, and wept, and fasted until evening, for Saul, and for Jonathan his son, and for the people of Jehovah, and for the house of Israel, because they were fallen by the sword.
And David said to the young man who told him, From where are thou? And he answered, I am the son of a sojourner, an Amalekite.
And David said to him, Why were thou not afraid to put forth thy hand to destroy Jehovah's anointed?
And David called one of the young men, and said, Go near, and fall upon him. And he smote him so that he died.
And David said to him, Thy blood be upon thy head, for thy mouth has testified against thee, saying, I have slain Jehovah's anointed.
And David lamented with this lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his son
Thy glory, O Israel, is slain upon thy high places! How are the mighty fallen!
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the streets of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistines rejoice, lest the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph.
Ye mountains of Gilboa, let there be no dew nor rain upon you, neither fields of offerings, for there the shield of the mighty was vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, not anointed with oil.
From the blood of the slain, from the fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul returned not empty.
Saul and Jonathan, men who were loved and pleasant, undivided; comely in their lives, and undivided in their death; swifter than eagles, they were stronger than lions.
Ye daughters of Israel, weep over Saul, who clothed you delicately in scarlet, who put ornaments of gold upon your apparel.
How are the mighty fallen in the midst of the battle! Jonathan is slain upon thy high places.
I am distressed for thee, my brother Jonathan. Very pleasant thou have been to me. Thy love to me was wonderful, exceeding the love of women.
How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished!

And it came to pass after this, that David inquired of Jehovah, saying, Shall I go up into any of the cities of Judah? And Jehovah said to him, Go up. And David said, Where shall I go up? And he said, To Hebron.
So David went up there, and his two wives also, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite.
And David brought up his men who were with him, every man with his household, and they dwelt in the cities of Hebron.
And the men of Judah came, and there they anointed David king over the house of Judah. And they told David, saying, The men of Jabesh-gilead were those who buried Saul.
And David sent messengers to the men of Jabesh-gilead, and said to them, Blessed be ye of Jehovah, that ye have shown this kindness to your lord, even to Saul, and have buried him.
And now Jehovah show loving kindness and truth to you. And I also will reward you this kindness because ye have done this thing.
Now therefore let your hands be strong, and be ye valiant, for Saul your lord is dead, and also the house of Judah have anointed me king over them.
Now Abner the son of Ner, captain of Saul's army, had taken Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and brought him over to Mahanaim.
And he made him king over Gilead, and over the Ashurites, and over Jezreel, and over Ephraim, and over Benjamin, and over all Israel.
Ish-bosheth, Saul's son, was forty years old when he began to reign over Israel, and he reigned two years. But the house of Judah followed David.
And the time that David was king in Hebron over the house of Judah was seven years and six months.
And Abner the son of Ner, and the servants of Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, went out from Mahanaim to Gibeon.
And Joab the son of Zeruiah, and the servants of David, went out, and met them by the pool of Gibeon. And they sat down, the one on the one side of the pool, and the other on the other side of the pool.
And Abner said to Joab, Let the young men, I pray thee, arise and play before us. And Joab said, Let them arise.
twelve for Benjamin, and for Ish-bosheth the son of Saul, and twelve of the servants of David.
And each man caught his fellow by the head, and thrust his sword in his fellow's side, so they fell down together. Therefore that place was called Helkath-hazzurim, which is in Gibeon.
And the battle was very severe that day. And Abner was beaten, and the men of Israel, before the servants of David.
And the three sons of Zeruiah were there, Joab, and Abishai, and Asahel. And Asahel was as light of foot as a wild roe.
And Asahel pursued after Abner, and in going he turned not to the right hand nor to the left from following Abner.
Then Abner looked behind him, and said, Is it thou, Asahel? And he answered, It is I.
And Abner said to him, Turn thee aside to thy right hand or to thy left, and lay hold on one of the young men, and take his armor. But Asahel would not turn aside from following him.
And Abner said again to Asahel, Turn thee aside from following me. Why should I smite thee to the ground? How then would I hold up my face to Joab thy brother?
However he refused to turn aside. Therefore Abner with the hinder end of the spear smote him in the body, so that the spear came out behind him. And he fell down there, and died in the same place. And it came to pass, that as many as came to the place where Asahel fell down and died stood still.
But Joab and Abishai pursued after Abner. And the sun went down when they came to the hill of Ammah that lies before Giah by the way of the wilderness of Gibeon.
And the sons of Benjamin gathered themselves together after Abner, and became one band, and stood on the top of a hill.
Then Abner called to Joab, and said, Shall the sword devour for ever? Know thou not that it will be bitterness in the latter end? How long shall it be then, before thou bid the people return from following their brothers?
And Joab said, As God lives unless thou had spoken, surely then in the morning the people would have gone up every man from following his brother.
So Joab blew the trumpet. And all the people stood still, and pursued after Israel no more, neither did they fight any more.
And Abner and his men went all that night through the Arabah, and they passed over the Jordan, and went through all Bithron, and came to Mahanaim.
And Joab returned from following Abner. And when he had gathered all the people together, there lacked of David's servants nineteen men and Asahel.
But the servants of David had smitten of Benjamin, and of Abner's men, so that three hundred and sixty men died.
And they took up Asahel, and buried him in the sepulcher of his father, which was in Bethlehem. And Joab and his men went all night, and the day broke upon them at Hebron.

Now there was long war between the house of Saul and the house of David. And David grew stronger and stronger, but the house of Saul grew weaker and weaker.
and his firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess,
and his second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite, and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur,
and the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith, and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital,
and the sixth, Ithream, of Eglah, David's wife. These were born to David in Hebron.
And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and the house of David, that Abner made himself strong in the house of Saul.
Now Saul had a concubine whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of Aiah. And Ish-bosheth said to Abner, Why have thou gone in to my father's concubine?
Then Abner was very angry for the words of Ish-bosheth, and said, Am I a dog's head that belongs to Judah? This day I show kindness to the house of Saul thy father, to his brothers, and to his friends, and have not delivered thee into the hand of David, and yet thou charge me this day with a fault concerning this woman.
God do so to Abner, and more also, if, as Jehovah has sworn to David, I do not even so to him,
to transfer the kingdom from the house of Saul, and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah, from Dan even to Beersheba.
And he could not answer Abner another word because he feared him.
And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf, saying, Whose is the land? And saying, Make thy league with me, and, behold, my hand shall be with thee to bring about all Israel to thee.
And he said, Well! I will make a league with thee, but one thing I require of thee. That is, thou shall not see my face unless thou first bring Michal, Saul's daughter, when thou come to see my face.
And David sent messengers to Ish-bosheth, Saul's son, saying, Deliver to me my wife Michal whom I betrothed to me for a hundred foreskins of the Philistines.
And Ish-bosheth sent, and took her from her husband, even from Paltiel the son of Laish.
And her husband went with her, weeping as he went, and followed her to Bahurim. Then Abner said to him, Go, return, and he returned.
And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel, saying, In times past ye sought for David to be king over you.
Now then do it, for Jehovah has spoken of David, saying, By the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their enemies.
And Abner also spoke in the ears of Benjamin. And Abner also went to speak in the ears of David in Hebron all that seemed good to Israel, and to the whole house of Benjamin.
So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him. And David made Abner and the men who were with him a feast.
And Abner said to David, I will arise and go, and will gather all Israel to my lord the king that they may make a covenant with thee, and that thou may reign over all that thy soul desires. And David sent Abner away, and he went in peace.
And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from a foray, and brought in a great spoil with them, but Abner was not with David in Hebron, for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace.
When Joab and all the army that was with him came, they told Joab, saying, Abner the son of Ner came to the king, and he has sent him away, and he has gone in peace.
Then Joab came to the king, and said, What have thou done? Behold, Abner came to thee. Why is it that thou have sent him away, and he is quite gone?
Thou know Abner the son of Ner, that he came to deceive thee, and to know thy going out and thy coming in, and to know all that thou do.
And when Joab came out from David, he sent messengers after Abner, and they brought him back from the well of Sirah, but David knew it not.
And when Abner was returned to Hebron, Joab took him aside into the midst of the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there in the body, so that he died, for the blood of Asahel his brother.
And afterward, when David heard it, he said, I and my kingdom are guiltless before Jehovah forever of the blood of Abner the son of Ner.
Let it fall upon the head of Joab, and upon all his father's house. And let there not fail from the house of Joab one who has an issue, or who is a leper, or who leans on a staff, or who falls by the sword, or who lacks bread.
So Joab and Abishai his brother killed Abner because he had killed their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle.
And David said to Joab, and to all the people who were with him, Rend your clothes, and gird you with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And king David followed the bier.
And they buried Abner in Hebron. And the king lifted up his voice, and wept at the grave of Abner, and all the people wept.
And the king lamented for Abner, and said, Should Abner die as a fool dies?
Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters. As a man falls before the sons of iniquity, so did thou fall. And all the people wept again over him.
And all the people came to cause David to eat bread while it was yet day, but David swore, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if I taste bread, or anything else, till the sun is down.
And all the people took notice of it, and it pleased them, as whatever the king did pleased all the people.
So all the people and all Israel understood that day that it was not of the king to kill Abner the son of Ner.
And the king said to his servants, Know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in Israel?
And I am this day weak, though anointed king, and these men the sons of Zeruiah are too hard for me. Jehovah reward the evildoer according to his wickedness.

And when Saul's son, heard that Abner was dead in Hebron, his hands became feeble, and all the Israelites were troubled.
And Saul's son had two men who were captains of bands. The name of the one was Baanah, and the name of the other Rechab, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, of the sons of Benjamin, for Beeroth also is reckoned to Benjamin.
And the Beerothites fled to Gittaim, and have been sojourners there until this day.
Now Jonathan, Saul's son, had a son who was lame in his feet. He was five years old when the news came of Saul and Jonathan out of Jezreel, and his nurse took him up, and fled. And it came to pass, as she made haste to flee, that he fell, and became lame. And his name was Mephibosheth.
And the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, Rechab and Baanah, went, and came about the heat of the day to the house of Ish-bosheth, as he took his rest at noon.
And they came there into the midst of the house as though they would have fetched wheat, and they smote him in the body. And Rechab and Baanah his brother escaped.
Now when they came into the house, as he lay on his bed in his bedchamber, they smote him, and killed him, and beheaded him, and took his head, and went by the way of the Arabah all night.
And they brought the head of Ish-bosheth to David to Hebron, and said to the king, Behold, the head of Ish-bosheth, the son of Saul, thine enemy, who sought thy life. And Jehovah has avenged my lord the king this day of Saul, and of his seed.
And David answered Rechab and Baanah his brother, the sons of Rimmon the Beerothite, and said to them, As Jehovah lives, who has redeemed my soul out of all adversity,
when he who told me, saying, Behold, Saul is dead, thinking to have brought good news, I took hold of him, and killed him in Ziklag, which was the reward I gave him for his news.
How much more, when evil men have slain a righteous man in his own house upon his bed, shall I not now require his blood of your hand, and take you away from the earth?
And David commanded his young men, and they killed them, and cut off their hands and their feet, and hanged them up beside the pool in Hebron. But they took the head of Ish-bosheth, and buried it in the grave of Abner in Hebron.

Then all the tribes of Israel came to David to Hebron, and spoke, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
In times past, when Saul was king over us, it was thou who led out and brought in Israel. And Jehovah said to thee, Thou shall be shepherd of my people Israel, and thou shall be prince over Israel.
So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron. And king David made a covenant with them in Hebron before Jehovah, and they anointed David king over Israel.
David was thirty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years.
In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months, and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years over all Israel and Judah.
And the king and his men went to Jerusalem against the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, who spoke to David, saying, Unless thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shall not come in here, thinking, David cannot come in here.
Nevertheless David took the stronghold of Zion; the same is the city of David.
And David said on that day, Whoever smites the Jebusites, let him get up to the watercourse, and smite the lame and the blind, the hated by David's soul, because the blind and the lame say, He cannot come into the house.
And David dwelt in the stronghold, and called it the city of David. And David built round about from Millo and inward.
And David grew greater and greater, for Jehovah, the God of hosts, was with him.
And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and carpenters, and masons, and they built David a house.
And David perceived that Jehovah had established him king over Israel, and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake.
And David took for him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he came from Hebron, and there were yet sons and daughters born to David.
Shammua, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon,
and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet.
And when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David. And David heard of it, and went down to the stronghold.
Now the Philistines had come and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.
And David inquired of Jehovah, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? Will thou deliver them into my hand? And Jehovah said to David, Go up, for I will certainly deliver the Philistines into thy hand.
And David came to Baal-perazim, and David smote them there. And he said, Jehovah has broken my enemies before me, like the breach of waters. Therefore he called the name of that place Baal-perazim.
And they left their images there, and David and his men took them away.
And the Philistines came up yet again, and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.
And when David inquired of Jehovah, he said, Thou shall not go up. Make a circuit behind them, and come upon them opposite the mulberry trees.
And it shall be, when thou hear the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shall bestir thyself, for then Jehovah has gone out before thee to smite the army of the Philistines.
And David did so, as Jehovah commanded him, and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gezer.

And David again gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty thousand.
And David arose, and went with all the people who were with him, from Baale-judah, to bring up from there the ark of God, which is called by the Name, even the name of Jehovah of hosts who sits above the cherubim.
And they set the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab that was on the hill. And Uzzah and Ahio, the sons of Abinadab, drove the new cart.
And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab, which was on the hill, with the ark of God, and Ahio went before the ark.
And David and all the house of Israel played before Jehovah with all manner of instruments of fir-wood, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with castanets, and with cymbals.
And when they came to the threshing-floor of Nacon, Uzzah put forth to the ark of God, and took hold of it, for the oxen stumbled.
And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Uzzah, and God smote him there for his error, and he died there by the ark of God.
And David was displeased, because Jehovah had broken forth upon Uzzah. And he called that place Perez-uzzah, to this day.
And David was afraid of Jehovah that day, and he said, How shall the ark of Jehovah come to me?
So David would not remove the ark of Jehovah to him into the city of David, but David carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
And the ark of Jehovah remained in the house of Obed-edom the Gittite three months, and Jehovah blessed Obed-edom, and all his house.
And it was told king David, saying, Jehovah has blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that pertains to him, because of the ark of God. And David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-edom into the city of David with joy.
And it was so, that, when those who bore the ark of Jehovah had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fatling.
And David danced before Jehovah with all his might. And David was girded with a linen ephod.
So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of Jehovah with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.
And it was so, as the ark of Jehovah came into the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out at the window, and saw king David leaping and dancing before Jehovah, and she despised him in her heart.
And they brought in the ark of Jehovah, and set it in its place, in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it. And David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before Jehovah.
And when David had made an end of offering the burnt offering and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah of hosts.
And he dealt among all the people, even among the whole multitude of Israel, both to men and women, to every one a cake of bread, and a portion of flesh, and a cake of raisins. So all the people departed every one to his house.
Then David returned to bless his household. And Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David, and said, How glorious was the king of Israel today, who uncovered himself today in the eyes of the handmaids of his servants as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovers himself!
And David said to Michal, It was before Jehovah, who chose me above thy father, and above all his house, to appoint me prince over the people of Jehovah, over Israel. Therefore I will play before Jehovah.
And I will be yet more vile than this, and will be base in my own sight, but of the handmaids of whom thou have spoken, of them I shall be had in honor.
And Michal the daughter of Saul had no child to the day of her death.

And it came to pass, when the king dwelt in his house, and Jehovah had given him rest from all his enemies round about,
that the king said to Nathan the prophet, See now, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of God dwells within curtains.
And Nathan said to the king, Go, do all that is in thy heart, for Jehovah is with thee.
And it came to pass the same night, that the word of Jehovah came to Nathan, saying,
Go and tell my servant David, Thus says Jehovah, Shall thou build a house for me to dwell in?
For I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought up the sons of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a tent and in a tabernacle.
In all places in which I have walked with all the sons of Israel, did I speak a word with any of the tribes of Israel, whom I commanded to be shepherd of my people Israel, saying, Why have ye not built for me a house of cedar?
Now therefore thus thou shall say to my servant David, Thus says Jehovah of hosts, I took thee from the sheepfold, from following the sheep, that thou should be prince over my people, over Israel.
And I have been with thee wherever thou went, and have cut off all thine enemies from before thee. And I will make thee a great name, like the name of the great ones that are on the earth.
And I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place, and be moved no more. Neither shall the sons of iniquity afflict them any more, as at the first,
and as from the day that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel, and I will cause thee to rest from all thine enemies. Moreover Jehovah tells thee that Jehovah will make thee a house.
When thy days are fulfilled, and thou shall sleep with thy fathers, I will set up thy seed after thee, who shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish his kingdom.
He shall build a house for my name, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom forever.
I will be his father, and he shall be my son. If he commits iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men, and with the stripes of the sons of men,
but my loving kindness shall not depart from him, as I took it from Saul whom I put away before thee.
And thy house and thy kingdom shall be made sure forever before thee; thy throne shall be established forever.
According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so Nathan spoke to David.
Then David the king went in, and sat before Jehovah. And he said, Who am I, O lord Jehovah, and what is my house, that thou have brought me thus far?
And this was yet a small thing in thine eyes, O lord Jehovah, but thou have spoken also of thy servant's house for a great while to come, and this too according to the manner of men, O lord Jehovah!
And what can David say more to thee? For thou know thy servant, O lord Jehovah.
For thy word's sake, and according to thine own heart, thou have wrought all this greatness, to make thy servant know it.
Therefore thou are great, O Jehovah God, for there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
And what one nation on the earth is like thy people, even like Israel, whom God went to redeem to himself for a people, and to make him a name, and to do great things for you, and awesome things for thy land, before thy people whom thou redeemed to thee out of Egypt, from the nations and their gods?
And thou established to thyself thy people Israel to be a people to thee forever, and thou, Jehovah, became their God.
And now, O Jehovah God, the word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, confirm it forever, and do as thou have spoken.
And let thy name be magnified forever, saying, Jehovah of hosts is God over Israel, and the house of thy servant David shall be established before thee.
For thou, O Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, have revealed to thy servant, saying, I will build thee a house. Therefore thy servant has found in his heart to pray this prayer to thee.
And now, O lord Jehovah, thou are God, and thy words are truth, and thou have promised this good thing to thy servant.
Now therefore let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue forever before thee, for thou, O lord Jehovah, have spoken it. And with thy blessing let the house of thy servant be blessed forever.

And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them. And David took the bridle of the mother city out of the hand of the Philistines.
And he smote Moab, and measured them with the line, making them to lie down on the ground. And he measured two lines to put to death, and one full line to keep alive. And the Moabites became servants to David, and brought tribute.
David also smote Hadadezer the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he went to recover his dominion at the River.
And David took from him a thousand and seven hundred horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen. And David hocked all the chariot horses, but reserved of them for a hundred chariots.
And when the Syrians of Damascus came to aid Hadadezer king of Zobah, David smote of the Syrians twenty-two thousand men.
Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus, and the Syrians became servants to David, and brought tribute. And Jehovah gave victory to David wherever he went.
And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadadezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.
And from Betah and from Berothai, cities of Hadadezer, king David took exceedingly much brass.
And when Toi king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the army of Hadadezer,
then Toi sent Joram his son to king David to salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadadezer and smitten him, for Hadadezer had wars with Toi. And Joram brought with him vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and vessels of brass.
of Syria, and of Moab, and of the sons of Ammon, and of the Philistines, and of Amalek, and of the spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob, king of Zobah.
And David got a name for him when he returned from smiting the Syrians in the Valley of Salt, even eighteen thousand men.
And he put garrisons in Edom. He put garrisons throughout all Edom, and all the Edomites became servants to David. And Jehovah gave victory to David wherever he went.
And David reigned over all Israel. And David executed justice and righteousness to all his people.
And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the army, and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder,
and Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, were priests, and Seraiah was scribe,
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites, and David's sons were chief ministers.

And David said, Is there yet any who is left of the house of Saul that I may show him kindness for Jonathan's sake?
And there was of the house of Saul a servant whose name was Ziba, and they called him to David. And the king said to him, Are thou Ziba? And he said, Thy servant is he.
And the king said, Is there not yet any of the house of Saul that I may show the kindness of God to him? And Ziba said to the king, Jonathan has yet a son who is lame in his feet.
And the king said to him, Where is he? And Ziba said to the king, Behold, he is in the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, in Lo-debar.
Then king David sent, and fetched him out of the house of Machir the son of Ammiel, from Lo-debar.
And Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan, the son of Saul, came to David, and fell on his face, and did obeisance. And David said, Mephibosheth. And he answered, Behold, thy servant!
And David said to him, Fear not, for I will surely show thee kindness for Jonathan thy father's sake, and will restore to thee all the land of Saul thy father, and thou shall eat bread at my table continually.
And he did obeisance, and said, What is thy servant that thou should look upon such a dead dog as I am?
Then the king called to Ziba, Saul's servant, and said to him, All that pertained to Saul and to all his house I have given to thy master's son.
And thou shall till the land for him, thou, and thy sons, and thy servants. And thou shall bring in the fruits that thy master's son may have bread to eat, but Mephibosheth thy master's son shall always eat bread at my table. Now Ziba had fifteen sons and twenty servants.
Then Ziba said to the king, According to all that my lord the king commands his servant, so shall thy servant do. As for Mephibosheth, the king said, he shall eat at my table as one of the king's sons.
And Mephibosheth had a young son, whose name was Mica. And all who dwelt in the house of Ziba were servants to Mephibosheth.
So Mephibosheth dwelt in Jerusalem, for he ate continually at the king's table. And he was lame in both his feet.

And it came to pass after this, that the king of the sons of Ammon died, and Hanun his son reigned in his stead.
And David said, I will show kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash, as his father showed kindness to me. So David sent by his servants to comfort him concerning his father. And David's servants came into the land of the sons of Ammon.
But the rulers of the sons of Ammon said to Hanun their lord, Think thou that David honors thy father, in that he has sent comforters to thee? Has not David sent his servants to thee to search the city, and to spy it out, and to overthrow it?
So Hanun took David's servants, and shaved off the one half of their beards, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away.
When they told it to David, he sent to meet them, for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said, Tarry at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.
And when the sons of Ammon saw that they had become odious to David, the sons of Ammon sent and hired the Syrians of Beth-rehob, and the Syrians of Zobah, twenty thousand footmen, and the king of Maacah with a thousand men, and the men of Tob twelve thousand men.
And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the army of the mighty men.
And the sons of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the entrance of the gate. And the Syrians of Zobah and of Rehob, and the men of Tob and Maacah, were by themselves in the field.
Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him in front and behind, he chose from all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians.
And the rest of the people he committed into the hand of Abishai his brother. And he put them in array against the sons of Ammon.
And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me, but if the sons of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will come and help thee.
Be of good courage, and let us play the man for our people, and for the cities of our God. And Jehovah do that which seems good to him.
So Joab and the people who were with him drew near to the battle against the Syrians. And they fled before him.
And when the sons of Ammon saw that the Syrians had fled, they likewise fled before Abishai, and entered into the city. Then Joab returned from the sons of Ammon, and came to Jerusalem.
And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they gathered themselves together.
And Hadarezer sent, and brought out the Syrians who were beyond the River, and they came to Helam, with Shobach the captain of the army of Hadarezer at their head.
And it was told David. And he gathered all Israel together, and passed over the Jordan, and came to Helam. And the Syrians set themselves in array against David, and fought with him.
And the Syrians fled before Israel. And David killed of the Syrians the men of seven hundred chariots, and forty thousand horsemen, and smote Shobach the captain of their army so that he died there.
And when all the kings who were servants to Hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with Israel, and served them. So the Syrians were afraid to help the sons of Ammon any more.

And it came to pass, at the return of the year, at the time when kings go out to battle, that David sent Joab, and his servants with him, and all Israel. And they destroyed the sons of Ammon, and besieged Rabbah. But David remained at Jerusalem.
And it came to pass at evening, that David arose from off his bed, and walked upon the roof of the king's house. And from the roof he saw a woman bathing, and the woman was very beautiful to look upon.
And David sent and inquired after the woman. And one said, Is not this Bathsheba, the daughter of Eliam, the wife of Uriah the Hittite?
And David sent messengers, and took her. And she came in to him, and he lay with her (for she was purified from her uncleanness), and she returned to her house.
And the woman conceived. And she sent and told David, and said, I am with child.
And David sent to Joab, saying, Send me Uriah the Hittite. And Joab sent Uriah to David.
And when Uriah came to him, David asked of him how Joab did, and how the people fared, and how the war prospered.
And David said to Uriah, Go down to thy house, and wash thy feet. And Uriah departed out of the king's house, and a gift from the king followed him.
But Uriah slept at the door of the king's house with all the servants of his lord, and did not go down to his house.
And when they had told David, saying, Uriah did not go down to his house, David said to Uriah, Have thou not come from a journey? Why did thou not go down to thy house?
And Uriah said to David, The ark, and Israel, and Judah, abide in booths, and my lord Joab, and the servants of my lord, are encamped in the open field. Shall I then go into my house, to eat and to drink, and to lie with my wife? As thou live, and as thy soul lives, I will not do this thing.
And David said to Uriah, Remain here today also, and tomorrow I will let thee depart. So Uriah abode in Jerusalem that day, and the morrow.
And when David had called him, he ate and drank before him, and he made him drunk. And at evening he went out to lie on his bed with the servants of his lord, but did not go down to his house.
And it came to pass in the morning, that David wrote a letter to Joab, and sent it by the hand of Uriah.
And he wrote in the letter, saying, Set ye Uriah in the forefront of the hottest battle, and retire ye from him, that he may be smitten, and die.
And it came to pass, when Joab kept watch upon the city, that he assigned Uriah to the place where he knew that valiant men were.
And the men of the city went out, and fought with Joab. And there fell some of the people, even of the servants of David, and Uriah the Hittite died also.
Then Joab sent and told David all the things concerning the war.
And he charged the messenger, saying, When thou have made an end of telling all the things concerning the war to the king,
it shall be that, if the king's wrath arise, and he says to thee, Why did ye go so near to the city to fight? Did ye not know that they would shoot from the wall?
Who smote Abimelech the son of Jerubbesheth? Did not a woman cast an upper millstone upon him from the wall so that he died at Thebez? Why did ye go so near the wall? Then thou shall say, Thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.
So the messenger went, and came and told David all that Joab had sent him.
And the messenger said to David, The men prevailed against us, and came out to us into the field, and we were upon them even to the entrance of the gate.
And the shooters shot at thy servants from off the wall. And some of the king's servants are dead, and thy servant Uriah the Hittite is dead also.
Then David said to the messenger, Thus thou shall say to Joab, Let not this thing displease thee, for the sword devours one as well as another. Make thy battle stronger against the city, and overthrow it. And encourage thou him.
And when the wife of Uriah heard that Uriah her husband was dead, she made lamentation for her husband.
And when the mourning was past, David sent and took her home to his house, and she became his wife, and bore him a son. But the thing that David had done displeased Jehovah.

the one rich, and the other poor.
The rich man had exceedingly many flocks and herds,
but the poor man had nothing except one little ewe lamb, which he had bought and nourished up. And it grew up together with him, and with his sons. It ate of his own morsel, and drank of his own cup, and lay in his bosom, and was to him as a daughter.
And there came a traveler to the rich man, and he spared to take of his own flock and of his own herd to dress for the wayfaring man who came to him, but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man who came to him.
And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man, and he said to Nathan, As Jehovah lives, the man who has done this is worthy to die.
And he shall restore the lamb fourfold, because he did this thing, and because he had no pity.
And Nathan said to David, Thou are the man. Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul.
And I gave thee thy master's house, and thy master's wives into thy bosom, and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah. And if that had been too little, I would have added to thee such and such things.
Why have thou despised the word of Jehovah, to do that which is evil in his sight? Thou have smitten Uriah the Hittite with the sword, and have taken his wife to be thy wife, and have slain him with the sword of the sons of Ammon.
Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thy house, because thou have despised me, and have taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife.
Thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house. And I will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give them to thy neighbor, and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun.
For thou did it secretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun.
And David said to Nathan, I have sinned against Jehovah. And Nathan said to David, Jehovah also has put away thy sin; thou shall not die.
However, because by this deed thou have given great occasion to the enemies of Jehovah to blaspheme, the child also that is born to thee shall surely die.
And Nathan departed to his house. And Jehovah struck the child that Uriah's wife bore to David, and it was very sick.
David therefore besought God for the child. And David fasted, and went in, and lay all night upon the ground.
And the elders of his house arose, and stood beside him, to raise him up from the ground, but he would not, neither did he eat bread with them.
And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died. And the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead, for they said, Behold, while the child was yet alive we spoke to him, and he did not hearken to our voice, how will he then vex himself, if we tell him that the child is dead!
But when David saw that his servants were whispering together, David perceived that the child was dead. And David said to his servants, Is the child dead? And they said, He is dead.
Then David arose from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his apparel. And he came into the house of Jehovah, and worshiped. Then he came to his own house, and when he required, they set bread before him, and he ate.
Then his servants said to him, What thing is this that thou have done? Thou fasted and wept for the child while it was alive, but when the child was dead, thou arose and ate bread.
And he said, While the child was yet alive, I fasted and wept. For I said, Who knows whether Jehovah will not be gracious to me, that the child may live?
But now he is dead; why should I fast? Can I bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he will not return to me.
And David comforted Bathsheba his wife, and went in to her, and lay with her. And she bore a son, and he called his name Solomon. And Jehovah loved him,
and he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet. And he called his name Jedidiah, for Jehovah's sake.
Now Joab fought against Rabbah of the sons of Ammon, and took the royal city.
And Joab sent messengers to David, and said, I have fought against Rabbah; yea, I have taken the city of waters.
Now therefore gather the rest of the people together, and encamp against the city, and take it, lest I take the city, and it be called after my name.
And David gathered all the people together, and went to Rabbah, and fought against it, and took it.
And he took the crown of their king from off his head. And the weight of it was a talent of gold, and in it were precious stones. And it was set on David's head. And he brought forth the spoil of the city, exceedingly much.
And he brought forth the people that were in it, and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of iron, and made them pass through the brick-kiln. And thus he did to all the cities of the sons of Ammon. And David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.

And it came to pass after this, that Absalom the son of David had a fair sister whose name was Tamar. And Amnon the son of David loved her.
And Amnon was so frustrated that he fell sick because of his sister Tamar. For she was a virgin, and it seemed hard to Amnon to do anything to her.
But Amnon had a friend whose name was Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, David's brother. And Jonadab was a very sly man.
And he said to him, Why, O son of the king, are thou emaciated this way from day to day? Will thou not tell me? And Amnon said to him, I love Tamar, my brother Absalom's sister.
And Jonadab said to him, Lie down on thy bed, and feign thyself sick. And when thy father comes to see thee, say to him, Let my sister Tamar come, I pray thee, and give me bread to eat, and dress the food in my sight, that I may see it, and eat it from her hand.
So Amnon lay down, and feigned himself sick. And when the king came to see him, Amnon said to the king, Let my sister Tamar come, I pray thee, and make me a couple of cakes in my sight, that I may eat from her hand.
Then David sent home to Tamar, saying, Go now to thy brother Amnon's house, and make food for him.
So Tamar went to her brother Amnon's house, and he was laid down. And she took dough, and kneaded it, and made cakes in his sight, and baked the cakes.
And she took the pan, and poured them out before him, but he refused to eat. And Amnon said, Have all men out from me. And they went out every man from him.
And Amnon said to Tamar, Bring the food into the chamber that I may eat from thy hand. And Tamar took the cakes that she had made, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother.
And when she had brought them near to him to eat, he took hold of her, and said to her, Come, lie with me, my sister.
And she answered him, No, my brother, do not force me, for no such thing ought to be done in Israel. Do not do thou this folly.
And I, where shall I carry my shame? And as for thee, thou will be as one of the fools in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, speak to the king, for he will not withhold me from thee.
However he would not hearken to her voice, but being stronger than she, he forced her, and lay with her.
Then Amnon hated her with exceedingly great hatred, for the hatred with which he hated her was greater than the love with which he had loved her. And Amnon said to her, Arise, be gone.
And she said to him, Not so, because this great wrong in putting me forth is worse than the other that thou did to me. But he would not hearken to her.
Then he called his servant who ministered to him, and said, Put this woman out from me now, and bolt the door after her.
And she had a garment of various colors upon her, for with such robes were the king's daughters who were virgins appareled. Then his servant brought her out, and bolted the door after her.
And Tamar put ashes on her head, and tore her garment of various colors that was on her. And she laid her hand on her head, and went her way, crying aloud as she went.
And Absalom her brother said to her, Has Amnon thy brother been with thee? But now hold thy peace, my sister. He is thy brother. Do not take this thing to heart. So Tamar remained desolate in her brother Absalom's house.
But when king David heard of all these things, he was very angry.
And Absalom spoke to Amnon neither good nor bad, for Absalom hated Amnon, because he had forced his sister Tamar.
And it came to pass after two full years, that Absalom had sheep-shearers in Baal-hazor, which is beside Ephraim, and Absalom invited all the king's sons.
And Absalom came to the king, and said, Behold now, thy servant has sheep-shearers. Let the king, I pray thee, and his servants go with thy servant.
And the king said to Absalom, No, my son, let us not all go, lest we be burdensome to thee. And he pressed him. However he would not go, but blessed him.
Then Absalom said, If not, I pray thee, let my brother Amnon go with us. And the king said to him, Why should he go with thee?
But Absalom pressed him, and he let Amnon and all the king's sons go with him.
And Absalom commanded his servants, saying, Notice ye now, when Amnon's heart is merry with wine, and when I say to you, Smite Amnon, then kill him. Fear not; have I not commanded you? Be courageous, and be valiant.
And the servants of Absalom did to Amnon as Absalom had commanded. Then all the king's sons arose, and every man got up upon his mule, and fled.
And it came to pass, while they were in the way, that the news came to David, saying, Absalom has slain all the king's sons, and there is not one of them left.
Then the king arose, and tore his garments, and lay on the earth, and all his servants stood by with their clothes torn.
And Jonadab, the son of Shimeah, David's brother, answered and said, Let not my lord suppose that they have killed all the young men the king's sons, for Amnon only is dead. For by the command of Absalom this has been determined from the day that he forced his sister Tamar.
Now therefore let not my lord the king take the thing to his heart, to think that all the king's sons are dead, for only Amnon is dead.
But Absalom fled. And the young man who kept the watch lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, there came much people by the way of the hill-side behind him.
And Jonadab said to the king, Behold, the king's sons have come; as thy servant said, so it is.
And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of speaking, that, behold, the king's sons came, and lifted up their voice, and wept. And the king also and all his servants wept very much.
But Absalom fled, and went to Talmai the son of Ammihur, king of Geshur. And David mourned for his son every day.
So Absalom fled, and went to Geshur, and was there three years.
And the soul of king David longed to go forth to Absalom, for he was comforted concerning Amnon, seeing he was dead.

Now Joab the son of Zeruiah perceived that the king's heart was toward Absalom.
And Joab sent to Tekoa, and fetched from there a wise woman, and said to her, I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on mourning apparel, I pray thee, and do not anoint thyself with oil, but be as a woman who has a long time mourned for the dead.
And go in to the king, and speak on this manner to him. So Joab put the words in her mouth.
And when the woman of Tekoa spoke to the king, she fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance, and said, Help, O king.
And the king said to her, What troubles thee? And she answered, Of a truth I am a widow, and my husband is dead.
And thy handmaid had two sons, and they two strove together in the field, and there was none to part them, but the one smote the other, and killed him.
And, behold, the whole family is risen against thy handmaid, and they say, Deliver him who smote his brother that we may kill him for the life of his brother whom he killed, and so destroy the heir also. Thus they will quench my coal which is left, and will leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the face of the earth.
And the king said to the woman, Go to thy house, and I will give charge concerning thee.
And the woman of Tekoa said to the king, My lord, O king, the iniquity be on me, and on my father's house, and the king and his throne be guiltless.
And the king said, Whoever says anything to thee, bring him to me, and he shall not touch thee any more.
Then she said, I pray thee, let the king remember Jehovah thy God, that the avenger of blood not destroy any more, lest they destroy my son. And he said, As Jehovah lives, there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth.
Then the woman said, Let thy handmaid, I pray thee, speak a word to my lord the king. And he said, Say on.
And the woman said, Why then have thou devised such a thing against the people of God? For in speaking this word the king is as he who is guilty, in that the king does not fetch home again his banished one.
For we must die, and are as water split on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again, neither does God take away life, but devises means that he who is banished be not an outcast from him.
Now therefore seeing that I have come to speak this word to my lord the king, it is because the people have made me afraid. And thy handmaid said, I will now speak to the king. It may be that the king will perform the request of his servant.
For the king will hear to deliver his servant out of the hand of the man who would destroy me and my son together out of the inheritance of God.
Then thy handmaid said, Let, I pray thee, the word of my lord the king be gracious, for as an agent of God, so is my lord the king to discern good and bad. And Jehovah thy God be with thee.
Then the king answered and said to the woman, Hide not from me, I pray thee, anything that I shall ask thee. And the woman said, Let my lord the king now speak.
And the king said, Is the hand of Joab with thee in all this? And the woman answered and said, As thy soul lives, my lord the king, none can turn to the right hand or to the left from anything that my lord the king has spoken, for thy servant Joab, he bade me, and he put all these words in the mouth of thy handmaid.
Thy servant Joab has done this thing to change the face of the matter. And my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an agent of God, to know all things that are on the earth.
And the king said to Joab, Behold now, I have done this thing. Go therefore, bring the young man Absalom back.
And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and did obeisance, and blessed the king. And Joab said, Today thy servant knows that I have found favor in thy sight, my lord, O king, in that the king has performed the request of his servant.
So Joab arose and went to Geshur, and brought Absalom to Jerusalem.
And the king said, Let him turn to his own house, but let him not see my face. So Absalom turned to his own house, and did not see the king's face.
Now in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for his beauty; from the sole of his foot even to the crown of his head there was no blemish in him.
And when he cut the hair of his head (now it was at every year's end that he cut it, because it was heavy on him, therefore he cut it), he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels, after the king's weight.
And to Absalom there were born three sons, and one daughter whose name was Tamar. She was a woman of a fair countenance.
And Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem, and he did not see the king's face.
Then Absalom sent for Joab to send him to the king, but he would not come to him. And he sent again a second time, but he would not come.
Therefore he said to his servants, See, Joab's field is near mine, and he has barley there. Go and set it on fire. And Absalom's servants set the field on fire.
Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom to his house, and said to him, Why have thy servants set my field on fire?
And Absalom answered Joab, Behold, I sent to thee, saying, Come here, that I may send thee to the king to say, Why have I come from Geshur? It were better for me to still be there. Now therefore let me see the king's face, and if there be iniquity in me, let him kill me.
So Joab came to the king, and told him. And when he had called for Absalom, he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the ground before the king. And the king kissed Absalom.

And it came to pass after this, that Absalom prepared for him a chariot and horses, and fifty men to run before him.
And Absalom rose up early, and stood beside the way of the gate. And it was so, that, when any man had a suit which should come to the king for judgment, then Absalom called to him, and said, Of what city are thou? And he said, Thy servant is of one of the tribes of Israel.
And Absalom said to him, See, thy matters are good and right, but there is no man appointed by the king to hear thee.
Absalom said moreover, Oh that I were made judge in the land, that every man who has any suit or case might come to me, and I would do for him justice!
And it was so, that, when any man came near to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took hold of him, and kissed him.
And on this manner Absalom did to all Israel who came to the king for judgment. So Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel.
And it came to pass at the end of forty years, that Absalom said to the king, I pray thee, let me go and pay my vow, which I have vowed to Jehovah, in Hebron.
For thy servant vowed a vow while I abode at Geshur in Syria, saying, If Jehovah shall indeed bring me again to Jerusalem, then I will serve Jehovah.
And the king said to him, Go in peace. So he arose, and went to Hebron.
But Absalom sent spies throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, As soon as ye hear the sound of the trumpet, then ye shall say, Absalom is king in Hebron.
And with Absalom went two hundred men out of Jerusalem who were invited, and went in their simplicity. And they did not know anything.
And Absalom sent for Ahithophel the Gilonite, David's counselor, from his city, even from Giloh, while he was offering the sacrifices. And the conspiracy was strong, for the people increased continually with Absalom.
And there came a messenger to David, saying, The hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom.
And David said to all his servants who were with him at Jerusalem, Arise, and let us flee, for otherwise none of us shall escape from Absalom. Make speed to depart, lest he overtake us quickly, and bring down evil upon us, and smite the city with the edge of the sword.
And the king's servants said to the king, Behold, thy servants are ready to do whatever my lord the king shall choose.
And the king went forth, and all his household after him. And the king left ten women, who were concubines, to keep the house.
And the king went forth, and all the people after him, and they remained in Beth-merhak.
And all his servants passed on beside him; and all the Cherethites, and all the Pelethites, and all the Gittites, six hundred men who came after him from Gath, passed on before the king.
Then the king said to Ittai the Gittite, Why do thou also go with us? Return, and abide with the king, for thou are a foreigner, and also an exile. Return to thine own place.
Whereas thou came but yesterday, should I this day make thee go up and down with us, seeing I go where I may? Return thou, and take back thy brothers. Mercy and truth be with thee.
And Ittai answered the king, and said, As Jehovah lives, and as my lord the king lives, surely in what place my lord the king shall be, whether for death or for life, even there thy servant will also be.
And David said to Ittai, Go and pass over. And Ittai the Gittite passed over, and all his men, and all the little ones that were with him.
And all the country wept with a loud voice, and all the people passed over. The king himself also passed over the brook Kidron, and all the people passed over toward the way of the wilderness.
And, lo, Zadok also came, and all the Levites with him, bearing the ark of the covenant of God. And they set down the ark of God, and Abiathar went up until all the people had finished passing out of the city.
And the king said to Zadok, Carry back the ark of God into the city. If I shall find favor in the eyes of Jehovah he will bring me again, and show me both it, and his habitation.
But if he says thus, I have no delight in thee, behold, here I am. Let him do to me as seems good to him.
The king said also to Zadok the priest, Are thou not a seer? Return into the city in peace, and your two sons with you, Ahimaaz thy son, and Jonathan the son of Abiathar.
See, I will remain at the fords of the wilderness until there comes word from you to report to me.
Therefore Zadok and Abiathar carried the ark of God again to Jerusalem, and they abode there.
And David went up by the ascent of the mount of Olives, and wept as he went up, and he had his head covered, and went barefoot. And all the people who were with him covered every man his head, and they went up, weeping as they went up.
And it was told David, saying, Ahithophel is among the conspirators with Absalom. And David said, O Jehovah, I pray thee, turn the counsel of Ahithophel into foolishness.
And it came to pass, that, when David came to the top of the ascent, where God was worshiped, behold, Hushai the Archite came to meet him with his coat torn, and dirt upon his head.
And David said to him, If thou pass on with me, then thou will be a burden to me,
but if thou return to the city, and say to Absalom, I will be thy servant, O king. As I have been thy father's servant in time past, so I will now be thy servant, then thou will defeat for me the counsel of Ahithophel.
And have thou not there with thee Zadok and Abiathar the priests? Therefore it shall be, that whatever thing thou shall hear out of the king's house, thou shall tell it to Zadok and Abiathar the priests.
Behold, they have there with them their two sons, Ahimaaz, Zadok's son, and Jonathan, Abiathar's son. And by them ye shall send to me everything that ye shall hear.
So Hushai, David's friend, came into the city, and Absalom came into Jerusalem.

And when David was a little past the top of the ascent, behold, Ziba the servant of Mephibosheth met him with a couple of saddled donkeys, and upon them two hundred loaves of bread, and a hundred clusters of raisins, and a hundred of summer fruits, and a bottle of wine.
And the king said to Ziba, What do thou mean by these? And Ziba said, The donkeys are for the king's household to ride on, and the bread and summer fruit for the young men to eat, and the wine, that such as are faint in the wilderness may drink.
And the king said, And where is thy master's son? And Ziba said to the king, Behold, he abides at Jerusalem, for he said, Today the house of Israel will restore for me the kingdom of my father.
Then the king said to Ziba, Behold, all that pertains to Mephibosheth is thine. And Ziba said, I do obeisance. Let me find favor in thy sight, my lord, O king.
And when king David came to Bahurim, behold, there came out from there a man of the family of the house of Saul whose name was Shimei, the son of Gera. He came out, cursing as he came.
And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of king David, and all the people and all the mighty men were on his right hand and on his left.
And thus said Shimei when he cursed, Begone, begone, thou man of blood, and base fellow.
Jehovah has returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul in whose stead thou have reigned. And Jehovah has delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy son, and, behold, thou are taken in thine own mischief because thou are a man of blood.
Then Abishai the son of Zeruiah said to the king, Why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? Let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his head.
And the king said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah? Because he curses, and because Jehovah has said to him, Curse David, who then shall say, Why have thou done so?
And David said to Abishai, and to all his servants, Behold, my son, who came forth from my bowels, seeks my life. How much more this Benjamite? Let him alone, and let him curse, for Jehovah has bidden him.
It may be that Jehovah will look on the wrong done to me, and that Jehovah will reward me good for his cursing of me this day.
So David and his men went by the way, and Shimei went along on the hill-side opposite him, and cursed as he went, and threw stones at him, and cast dust.
And the king, and all the people who were with him, came weary, and he refreshed himself there.
And Absalom, and all the people, the men of Israel, came to Jerusalem, and Ahithophel with him.
And it came to pass, when Hushai the Archite, David's friend, came to Absalom, that Hushai said to Absalom, Live, O king. Live, O king.
And Absalom said to Hushai, Is this thy kindness to thy friend? Why did thou not go with thy friend?
And Hushai said to Absalom, No, but whom Jehovah, and this people, and all the men of Israel have chosen, his will I be, and with him I will abide.
And again, whom should I serve? Is it not in the presence of his son? As I have served in thy father's presence, so I will be in thy presence.
Then Absalom said to Ahithophel, Give your counsel what we shall do.
And Ahithophel said to Absalom, Go in to thy father's concubines that he has left to keep the house, and all Israel will hear that thou are abhorred by thy father. Then the hands of all who are with thee will be strong.
So they spread Absalom a tent upon the top of the house, and Absalom went in to his father's concubines in the sight of all Israel.
And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he gave in those days, was as if a man inquired at the oracle of God; so was all the counsel of Ahithophel both with David and with Absalom.

Moreover Ahithophel said to Absalom, Let me now choose out twelve thousand men, and I will arise and pursue after David this night.
And I will come upon him while he is weary and weak-handed, and will make him afraid. And all the people who are with him shall flee. And I will only smite the king,
and I will bring back all the people to thee. The man whom thou seek is as if all returned, so all the people shall be in peace.
And the saying pleased Absalom well, and all the elders of Israel.
Then Absalom said, Call now Hushai the Archite also, and let us hear likewise what he says.
And when Hushai came to Absalom, Absalom spoke to him, saying, Ahithophel has spoken after this manner. Shall we do after his saying? If not, speak thou.
And Hushai said to Absalom, The counsel that Ahithophel has given this time is not good.
Hushai said moreover, Thou know thy father and his men, that they are mighty men, and they are chafed in their minds, as a bear robbed of her whelps in the field. And thy father is a man of war, and will not lodge with the people.
Behold, he is hid now in some pit, or in some other place. And it will come to pass, when some of them are fallen at the first, that whoever hears it will say, There is a slaughter among the people who follow Absalom.
And even he who is valiant, whose heart is as the heart of a lion, will utterly melt, for all Israel knows that thy father is a mighty man, and those who are with him are valiant men.
But I counsel that all Israel be gathered together to thee, from Dan even to Beersheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude, and that thou go to battle in thine own person.
So we shall come upon him in some place where he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the dew falls on the ground, and of him and of all the men who are with him we will not leave so much as one.
Moreover, if he be gotten into a city, then all Israel shall bring ropes to that city, and we will draw it into the river until there be not one small stone found there.
And Absalom and all the men of Israel said, The counsel of Hushai the Archite is better than the counsel of Ahithophel. For Jehovah had ordained to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, to the intent that Jehovah might bring evil upon Absalom.
Then Hushai said to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, Thus and thus did Ahithophel counsel Absalom and the elders of Israel, and thus and thus have I counseled.
Now therefore send quickly, and tell David, saying, Do not lodge this night at the fords of the wilderness, but by all means pass over, lest the king be swallowed up, and all the people who are with him.
Now Jonathan and Ahimaaz were staying by En-rogel. And a maid-servant used to go and tell them, and they went and told king David, for they might not be seen to come into the city.
But a lad saw them, and told Absalom. And they went away quickly, both of them, and came to the house of a man in Bahurim who had a well in his court, and they went down there.
And the woman took and spread the covering over the well's mouth, and spread ground grain on it. And nothing was known.
And Absalom's servants came to the woman to the house, and they said, Where are Ahimaaz and Jonathan? And the woman said to them, They have gone over the brook of water. And when they had sought and could not find them, they returned to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass, after they were departed, that they came up out of the well, and went and told king David. And they said to David, Arise ye, and pass quickly over the water, for thus Ahithophel has counseled against you.
Then David arose, and all the people who were with him, and they passed over the Jordan. By the morning light there lacked not one of them who was not gone over the Jordan.
And when Ahithophel saw that his counsel was not followed, he saddled his donkey, and arose, and got home to his city, and set his house in order, and hanged himself. And he died, and was buried in the sepulcher of his father.
Then David came to Mahanaim. And Absalom passed over the Jordan, he and all the men of Israel with him.
And Absalom set Amasa over the army instead of Joab. Now Amasa was the son of a man, whose name was Ithra the Israelite, who went in to Abigal the daughter of Nahash, sister to Zeruiah, Joab's mother.
And Israel and Absalom encamped in the land of Gilead.
And it came to pass, when David came to Mahanaim, that Shobi the son of Nahash of Rabbah of the sons of Ammon, and Machir the son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and Barzillai the Gileadite of Rogelim,
brought beds, and basins, and earthen vessels, and wheat, and barley, and meal, and roasted grain, and beans, and lentils, and roasted pulse,
and honey, and butter, and sheep, and cheese of the herd, for David, and for the people who were with him, to eat. For they said, The people are hungry, and weary, and thirsty, in the wilderness.

And David numbered the people who were with him, and set captains of thousands and captains of hundreds over them.
And David sent forth the people, a third part under the hand of Joab, and a third part under the hand of Abishai the son of Zeruiah, Joab's brother, and a third part under the hand of Ittai the Gittite. And the king said to the people, I will surely go forth with you myself also.
But the people said, Thou shall not go forth. For if we flee away, they will not care for us, neither if half of us die, will they care for us, but thou are worth ten thousand of us. Therefore now it is better that thou be ready to help us out of the city.
And the king said to them, What seems best to you I will do. And the king stood by the gate-side, and all the people went out by hundreds and by thousands.
And the king commanded Joab and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Deal gently for my sake with the young man, even with Absalom. And all the people heard when the king gave all the captains charge concerning Absalom.
So the people went out into the field against Israel, and the battle was in the forest of Ephraim.
And the people of Israel were smitten there before the servants of David, and there was a great slaughter there that day of twenty thousand men.
For the battle was there spread over the face of all the country, and the forest devoured more people that day than the sword devoured.
And Absalom chanced to meet the servants of David. And Absalom was riding upon his mule, and the mule went under the thick boughs of a great oak, and his head caught hold of the oak. And he was taken up between sky and earth, and the mule that was under him went on.
And a certain man saw it, and told Joab, and said, Behold, I saw Absalom hanging in an oak.
And Joab said to the man who told him, and, behold, thou saw it, and why did thou not smite him there to the ground? And I would have given thee ten pieces of silver, and a belt.
And the man said to Joab, Though I should receive a thousand pieces of silver in my hand, yet I would not put forth my hand against the king's son, for in our hearing the king charged thee and Abishai and Ittai, saying, Beware that none touch the young man Absalom.
Otherwise if I had dealt falsely against his life (and there is no matter hid from the king), then thou thyself would have set thyself against me.
Then Joab said, I will not delay thus with thee. And he took three darts in his hand, and thrust them through the heart of Absalom while he was yet alive in the midst of the oak.
And ten young men who bore Joab's armor encompassed about and smote Absalom, and killed him.
And Joab blew the trumpet, and the people returned from pursuing after Israel, for Joab held back the people.
And they took Absalom, and cast him into the great pit in the forest, and raised over him a very great heap of stones. And all Israel fled every man to his tent.
Now Absalom in his lifetime had taken and reared up for himself the pillar which is in the king's valley, for he said, I have no son to keep my name in remembrance. And he called the pillar after his own name, and it is called Absalom's monument to this day.
Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said, Let me now run, and bear the king news, how that Jehovah has avenged him of his enemies.
And Joab said to him, Thou shall not be the bearer of news this day, but thou shall bear news another day. But this day thou shall bear no news, because the king's son is dead.
Then Joab said to the Cushite, Go, tell the king what thou have seen. And the Cushite bowed himself to Joab, and ran.
Then Ahimaaz the son of Zadok said yet again to Joab, But come what may, let me, I pray thee, also run after the Cushite. And Joab said, Why will thou run, my son, seeing that thou will have no reward for the news?
But come what may, he said, I will run. And he said to him, Run. Then Ahimaaz ran by the way of the Plain, and outran the Cushite.
Now David was sitting between the two gates. And the watchman went up to the roof of the gate to the wall, and lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, a man running alone.
And the watchman cried, and told the king. And the king said, If he is alone, there is news in his mouth. And he came apace, and drew near.
And the watchman saw another man running. And the watchman called to the porter, and said, Behold, another man running alone. And the king said, He also brings news.
And the watchman said, I think the running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the son of Zadok. And the king said, He is a good man, and comes with good news.
And Ahimaaz called, and said to the king, All is well. And he bowed himself before the king with his face to the earth, and said, Blessed be Jehovah thy God, who has delivered up the men who lifted up their hand against my lord the king.
And the king said, Is it well with the young man Absalom? And Ahimaaz answered, When Joab sent the king's servant, even me thy servant, I saw a great tumult, but I knew not what it was.
And the king said, Turn aside, and stand here. And he turned aside, and stood still.
And, behold, the Cushite came. And the Cushite said, News for my lord the king, for Jehovah has avenged thee this day of all those who rose up against thee.
And the king said to the Cushite, Is it well with the young man Absalom? And the Cushite answered, The enemies of my lord the king, and all who rise up against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is.
And the king was much moved, and went up to the chamber over the gate, and wept. And as he went, thus he said, O my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! Would I had died for thee, O Absalom, my son, my son!

And it was told Joab, Behold, the king weeps and mourns for Absalom.
And the victory that day was turned into mourning to all the people, for the people heard say that day, The king grieves for his son.
And the people slipped away that day into the city, as people who are ashamed sneak away when they flee in battle.
And the king covered his face, and the king cried with a loud voice, O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!
And Joab came into the house to the king, and said, Thou have shamed this day the faces of all thy servants, who this day have saved thy life, and the lives of thy sons and of thy daughters, and the lives of thy wives, and the lives of thy concubines,
in that thou love those who hate thee, and hate those who love thee. For thou have declared this day that rulers and servants are nothing to thee. For this day I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died this day, then it would have pleased thee well.
Now therefore arise, go forth, and speak graciously to thy servants. For I swear by Jehovah, if thou do not go forth, there will not remain a man with thee this night. And that will be worse to thee than all the evil that has befallen thee from thy youth until now.
Then the king arose, and sat in the gate. And they told to all the people, saying, Behold, the king is sitting in the gate. And all the people came before the king. Now Israel had fled every man to his tent.
And all the people were contending throughout all the tribes of Israel, saying, The king delivered us out of the hand of our enemies, and he saved us out of the hand of the Philistines. And now he fled out of the land from Absalom.
And Absalom, whom we anointed over us, is dead in battle. Now therefore why speak ye not a word of bringing the king back?
And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak to the elders of Judah, saying, Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? Since the speech of all Israel has come to the king, to bring him to his house.
Ye are my brothers, ye are my bone and my flesh. Why then are ye the last to bring back the king?
And say ye to Amasa, Are thou not my bone and my flesh? God do so to me, and more also, if thou not be captain of the army before me continually in the place of Joab.
And he inclined the heart of all the men of Judah, even as the heart of one man, so that they sent to the king, saying, Return thou, and all thy servants.
So the king returned, and came to the Jordan. And Judah came to Gilgal, to go to meet the king, to bring the king over the Jordan.
And Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite, who was of Bahurim, hastened and came down with the men of Judah to meet king David.
And there were a thousand men of Benjamin with him, and Ziba the servant of the house of Saul, and his fifteen sons and his twenty servants with him. And they went through the Jordan in the presence of the king.
And there went over a ferry-boat to bring over the king's household, and to do what he thought good. And Shimei the son of Gera fell down before the king when he came over the Jordan.
And he said to the king, Let not my lord impute iniquity to me, neither remember thou that which thy servant did perversely the day that my lord the king went out of Jerusalem, that the king should take it to his heart.
For thy servant knows that I have sinned. Therefore, behold, I have come this day the first of all the house of Joseph to go down to meet my lord the king.
But Abishai the son of Zeruiah answered and said, Shall not Shimei be put to death for this, because he cursed Jehovah's anointed?
And David said, What have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah, that ye should this day be adversaries to me? Shall there any man be put to death this day in Israel? For do I not know that I am this day king over Israel?
And the king said to Shimei, Thou shall not die. And the king swore to him.
And Mephibosheth the son of Saul came down to meet the king. And he had neither dressed his feet, nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes, from the day the king departed until the day he came home in peace.
And it came to pass, when he came to Jerusalem to meet the king, that the king said to him, Why did thou not go with me, Mephibosheth?
And he answered, My lord, O king, my servant deceived me. For thy servant said, I will saddle for me a donkey, that I may ride on it, and go with the king, because thy servant is lame.
And he has slandered thy servant to my lord the king. But my lord the king is as an agent of God; do therefore what is good in thine eyes.
For all my father's house were but dead men before my lord the king. Yet thou set thy servant among those who ate at thine own table. What right therefore have I yet that I should cry any more to the king?
And the king said to him, Why do thou speak any more of thy matters? I say, thou and Ziba divide the land.
And Mephibosheth said to the king, Yea, let him take all, inasmuch as my lord the king has come in peace to his own house.
And Barzillai the Gileadite came down from Rogelim. And he went over the Jordan with the king to conduct him over the Jordan.
Now Barzillai was a very aged man, even eighty years old. And he had provided the king with sustenance while he lay at Mahanaim, for he was a very great man of wealth.
And the king said to Barzillai, Come thou over with me, and I will sustain thee with me in Jerusalem.
And Barzillai said to the king, How many are the days of the years of my life that I should go up with the king to Jerusalem?
I am this day eighty years old. Can I discern between good and bad? Can thy servant taste what I eat or what I drink? Can I hear any more the voice of singing men and singing women? Why then should thy servant be yet a burden to my lord the king?
Thy servant would but just go over the Jordan with the king, and why should the king recompense it to me with such a reward?
Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again, that I may die in my own city by the grave of my father and my mother. But behold, thy servant Chimham, let him go over with my lord the king, and do to him what shall seem good to thee.
And the king answered, Chimham shall go over with me, and I will do to him that which shall seem good to thee. And whatever thou shall require of me, that I will do for thee.
And all the people went over the Jordan, and the king went over. And the king kissed Barzillai, and blessed him, and he returned to his own place.
So the king went over to Gilgal, and Chimham went over with him. And all the people of Judah brought the king over, and also half the people of Israel.
And, behold, all the men of Israel came to the king, and said to the king, Why have our brothers the men of Judah stolen thee away, and brought the king, and his household, over the Jordan, and all David's men with him?
And all the men of Judah answered the men of Israel, Because the king is near of kin to us. Why then are ye angry for this matter? Have we eaten at all at the king's cost, or has he given us any gift?
And the men of Israel answered the men of Judah, and said, We have ten parts in the king, and we have also more right in David than ye. Why then did ye despise us, that our advice should not be had first in bringing back our king? And the words of the men of Judah were fiercer than the words of the men of Israel.

And there happened to be there a base fellow whose name was Sheba, the son of Bichri, a Benjamite. And he blew the trumpet, and said, We have no portion in David, neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse. Every man to his tents, O Israel.
So all the men of Israel went up from following David, and followed Sheba the son of Bichri, but the men of Judah clung to their king, from the Jordan even to Jerusalem.
And David came to his house at Jerusalem. And the king took the ten women his concubines, whom he had left to keep the house, and put them in ward, and provided them with sustenance, but did not go in to them. So they were shut up to the day of their death, living in widowhood.
Then the king said to Amasa, Call the men of Judah together to me within three days, and be thou here present.
So Amasa went to call the men of Judah together, but he delayed longer than the set time which he had appointed him.
And David said to Abishai, Now will Sheba the son of Bichri do us more harm than did Absalom. Take thou thy lord's servants, and pursue after him, lest he get him fortified cities, and escape out of our sight.
And there went out after him Joab's men, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites, and all the mighty men. And they went out of Jerusalem, to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
When they were at the great stone which is in Gibeon, Amasa came to meet them. And Joab was girded with his apparel of war that he had put on, and on it was a belt with a sword fastened upon his loins in the sheath of it. And as he went forth it fell out.
And Joab said to Amasa, Is it well with thee, my brother? And Joab took Amasa by the beard with his right hand to kiss him.
But Amasa took no heed to the sword that was in Joab's hand. So he smote him with it in the body, and shed out his bowels to the ground, and struck him not again, and he died. And Joab and Abishai his brother pursued after Sheba the son of Bichri.
And there stood by him one of Joab's young men, and said, He who favors Joab, and he who is for David, let him follow Joab.
And Amasa lay wallowing in his blood in the midst of the highway. And when the man saw that all the people stood still, he carried Amasa out of the highway into the field, and cast a garment over him, when he saw that everyone who came by him stood still.
When he was removed out of the highway, all the people went on after Joab to pursue after Sheba the son of Bichri.
And he went through all the tribes of Israel to Abel, and to Beth-maacah, and all the Berites. And they were gathered together, and also went after him.
And they came and besieged him in Abel of Beth-maacah, and they cast up a mound against the city, and it stood against the rampart. And all the people who were with Joab battered the wall, to throw it down.
Then a wise woman out of the city cried out, Hear, hear. Say, I pray you, to Joab, Come near here, that I may speak with thee.
And he came near to her, and the woman said, Are thou Joab? And he answered, I am. Then she said to him, Hear the words of thy handmaid. And he answered, I do hear.
Then she spoke, saying, They were accustomed to speak in old time, saying, They shall surely ask counsel at Abel, and so they ended the matter.
I am of those who are peaceable and faithful in Israel. Thou seek to destroy a city and a mother in Israel. Why will thou swallow up the inheritance of Jehovah?
And Joab answered and said, Far be it, far be it from me that I should swallow up or destroy.
The matter is not so, but a man of the hill-country of Ephraim, Sheba the son of Bichri by name, has lifted up his hand against the king, even against David. Deliver him only, and I will depart from the city. And the woman said to Joab, Behold, his head shall be thrown to thee over the wall.
Then the woman went to all the people in her wisdom. And they cut off the head of Sheba the son of Bichri, and threw it out to Joab. And he blew the trumpet, and they were dispersed from the city, every man to his tent. And Joab returned to Jerusalem to the king.
Now Joab was over all the army of Israel, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and over the Pelethites,
and Adoram was over the men subject to task work, and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was the recorder,
and Sheva was scribe, and Zadok and Abiathar were priests,
and also Ira the Jairite was chief minister to David.

And there was a famine in the days of David three years, year after year; and David sought the face of Jehovah. And Jehovah said, It is for Saul, and for his bloody house, because he put to death the Gibeonites.
And the king called the Gibeonites, and spoke to them (now the Gibeonites were not of the sons of Israel, but of the remnant of the Amorites, and the sons of Israel had sworn to them, and yet Saul sought to kill them in his zeal for the sons of Israel and Judah),
and David said to the Gibeonites, What shall I do for you? And with what shall I make atonement that ye may bless the inheritance of Jehovah?
And the Gibeonites said to him, It is no matter of silver or gold between us and Saul or his house, neither is it for us to put any man to death in Israel. And he said, What ye shall say, that I will do for you.
And they said to the king, The man who consumed us, and who devised against us, that we should be destroyed from remaining in any of the borders of Israel,
let seven men of his sons be delivered to us, and we will hang them up to Jehovah in Gibeah of Saul, the chosen of Jehovah. And the king said, I will give them.
But the king spared Mephibosheth, the son of Jonathan the son of Saul, because of Jehovah's oath that was between them, between David and Jonathan the son of Saul.
But the king took the two sons of Rizpah the daughter of Aiah whom she bore to Saul, Armoni and Mephibosheth, and the five sons of Merab the daughter of Saul whom she bore to Adriel the son of Barzillai the Meholathite.
And he delivered them into the hands of the Gibeonites. And they hanged them in the mountain before Jehovah, and they fell all seven together. And they were put to death in the days of harvest, in the first days, at the beginning of barley harvest.
And Rizpah the daughter of Aiah took sackcloth, and spread it for her upon the rock, from the beginning of harvest until water was poured upon them from heaven. And she neither allowed the birds of the heaven to rest on them by day, nor the beasts of the field by night.
And it was told David what Rizpah the daughter of Aiah, the concubine of Saul, had done.
And David went and took the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son from the men of Jabesh-gilead, who had stolen them from the street of Beth-shan where the Philistines had hanged them in the day that the Philistines killed Saul in Gilboa,
and he brought up from there the bones of Saul and the bones of Jonathan his son, and they gathered the bones of those who were hanged.
And they buried the bones of Saul and Jonathan his son in the country of Benjamin in Zela, in the sepulcher of Kish his father. And they performed all that the king commanded. And after that God was entreated for the land.
And the Philistines had war again with Israel. And David went down, and his servants with him, and fought against the Philistines. And David grew faint,
and Ishbibenob, who was of the sons of the giant, the weight of whose spear was three hundred shekels of brass in weight, he being girded with a new sword, thought to have slain David.
But Abishai the son of Zeruiah helped him, and smote the Philistine, and killed him. Then the men of David swore to him, saying, Thou shall no more go out with us to battle, that thou not quench the lamp of Israel.
And it came to pass after this, that there was again war with the Philistines at Gob. Then Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Saph, who was of the sons of the giant.
And there was again war with the Philistines at Gob. And Elhanan the son of Jaareoregim the Bethlehemite killed Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.
And there was again war at Gath, where there was a man of great stature who had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot six toes, twenty-four in number, and he also was born to the giant.
And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimei, David's brother, killed him.
These four were born to the giant in Gath, and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.

And he said, Jehovah is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, even mine.
God, my rock, in him I will take refuge, my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower, and my refuge, my savior. Thou save me from violence.
I will call upon Jehovah, who is worthy to be praised. So I shall be saved from my enemies.
For the waves of death encompassed me. The floods of ungodliness made me afraid.
The cords of Sheol were round about me. The snares of death came upon me.
In my distress I called upon Jehovah. Yea, I called to my God. And he heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry came into his ears.
Then the earth shook and trembled, the foundations of heaven quaked and were shaken, because he was angry.
There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured. Coals were kindled by it.
He bowed the heavens also, and came down, and thick darkness was under his feet.
And he rode upon a cherub, and flew. Yea, he was seen upon the wings of the wind.
And he made darkness pavilions round about him, gathering of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
At the brightness before him coals of fire were kindled.
Jehovah thundered from heaven, and the Most High uttered his voice.
And he sent out arrows, and scattered them, lightning, and discomfited them.
Then the channels of the sea appeared. The foundations of the world were laid bare by the rebuke of Jehovah, at the blast of the breath of his nostrils.
He sent from on high, he took me. He drew me out of many waters.
He delivered me from my strong enemy, from those who hated me, for they were too mighty for me.
They came upon me in the day of my calamity, but Jehovah was my support.
He brought me forth also into a large place. He delivered me, because he delighted in me.
Jehovah rewarded me according to my righteousness. According to the cleanness of my hands he has rewarded me.
For I have kept the ways of Jehovah, and have not wickedly departed from my God.
For all his ordinances were before me. And as for his statutes, I did not depart from them.
I was also perfect toward him, and I kept myself from my iniquity.
Therefore Jehovah has recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to my cleanness in his eyesight.
With the merciful thou will show thyself merciful. With the perfect man thou will show thyself perfect.
With the pure thou will show thyself pure. And with the perverse thou will show thyself contrary.
And the afflicted people thou will save, but thine eyes are upon the haughty, that thou may bring them down.
For thou are my lamp, O Jehovah. And Jehovah will lighten my darkness.
For by thee I run upon a troop. By my God do I leap over a wall.
As for God, his way is perfect. The word of Jehovah is tried. He is a shield to all those who take refuge in him.
For who is God, except Jehovah? And who is a rock, except our God?
God is my strong fortress, and he guides the perfect in his way.
He makes his feet like hinds' feet, and sets me upon my high places.
He teaches my hands to war, so that my arms bend a bow of brass.
Thou have also given me the shield of thy salvation, and thy gentleness has made me great.
Thou have enlarged my steps under me, and my feet have not slipped.
I have pursued my enemies, and destroyed them, neither did I turn again till they were consumed.
And I have consumed them, and smitten them through, so that they cannot arise. Yea, they are fallen under my feet.
For thou have girded me with strength to the battle. Thou have subdued under me those who rose up against me.
Thou have also made my enemies turn their backs to me, that I might cut off those who hate me.
They looked, but there was none to save; even to Jehovah, but he did not answer them.
Then I beat them small as the dust of the earth. I crushed them as the mire of the streets, and spread them abroad.
Thou have also delivered me from the strivings of my people. Thou have kept me to be the head of the nations. A people whom I have not known shall serve me.
The foreigners shall submit themselves to me. As soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me.
The foreigners shall fade away, and shall come trembling out of their hiding places.
Jehovah lives. And blessed be my rock. And exalted be God, the rock of my salvation,
Even the God who executes vengeance for me, and who brings down peoples under me,
and who brings me forth from my enemies. Yea, thou lift me up above those who rise up against me. Thou deliver me from the violent man.
Therefore I will give thanks to thee, O Jehovah, among gentiles, and will sing praises to thy name.
He gives great deliverance to his king, and shows loving kindness to his anointed, to David and to his seed, for evermore.

The Spirit of Jehovah spoke by me, and his word was upon my tongue.
The God of Israel said, The Rock of Israel spoke to me. He who rules over men righteously, who rules in the fear of God,
he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun rises, a morning without clouds, when the tender grass springs out of the earth, through clear shining after rain.
Truly my house is not so with God. Yet he has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all things, and sure. For it is all my salvation, and all my desire, though he does not make it to grow.
But the worthless shall be as thorns to be thrust away, all of them, because they cannot be taken with the hand.
But the man who touches them must be armed with iron and the staff of a spear, and they shall be utterly burned with fire in their place.
Josheb-basshebeth a Tahchemonite, chief of the captains, the same was Adino the Eznite, against eight hundred slain at one time.
And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodai the son of an Ahohite, one of the three mighty men with David when they defied the Philistines who were there gathered together to battle, and the men of Israel were gone away.
He arose, and smote the Philistines until his hand was weary, and his hand clung to the sword. And Jehovah wrought a great victory that day, and the people returned after him only to take spoil.
And after him was Shammah the son of Agee a Hararite. And the Philistines were gathered together into a troop where was a plot of ground full of lentils, and the people fled from the Philistines.
But he stood in the midst of the plot, and defended it, and killed the Philistines. And Jehovah wrought a great victory.
And three of the thirty chief men went down, and came to David in the harvest time to the cave of Adullam, and the troop of the Philistines was encamped in the valley of Rephaim.
And David was then in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem.
And David longed, and said, Oh that someone would give me water to drink from the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!
And the three mighty men broke through the army of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David. But he would not drink of it, but poured it out to Jehovah.
And he said, Be it far from me, O Jehovah, that I should do this, to drink the blood of the men who went in jeopardy of their lives? Therefore he would not drink it. These things the three mighty men did.
And Abishai, the brother of Joab, the son of Zeruiah, was chief of the three. And he lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them, and had a name among the three.
Was he not most honorable of the three? Therefore he was made their captain. However he did not attain to the first three.
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done mighty deeds, he killed the two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also went down and killed a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow.
And he killed an Egyptian, a good-looking man. And the Egyptian had a spear in his hand, but he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and killed him with his own spear.
These things Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did, and had a name among the three mighty men.
He was more honorable than the thirty, but he did not attain to the first three. And David set him over his guard.
Asahel the brother of Joab was one of the thirty; Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,
Shammah the Harodite, Elika the Harodite,
Helez the Paltite, Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite,
Abiezer the Anathothite, Mebunnai the Hushathite,
Zalmon the Ahohite, Maharai the Netophathite,
Heleb the son of Baanah the Netophathite, Ittai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the sons of Benjamin,
Benaiah a Pirathonite, Hiddai of the brooks of Gaash.
Abialbon the Arbathite, Azmaveth the Barhumite,
Eliahba the Shaalbonite (of the sons of Jashen), Jonathan,
Shammah the Hararite, Ahiam the son of Sharar the Ararite,
Eliphelet the son of Ahasbai, the son of the Maacathite, Eliam the son of Ahithophel the Gilonite,
Hezro the Carmelite, Paarai the Arbite,
Igal the son of Nathan of Zobah, Bani the Gadite,
Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Beerothite, armorbearers to Joab the son of Zeruiah,
Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
thirty-seven in all.

And again the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel, and he moved David against them, saying, Go, number Israel and Judah.
And the king said to Joab the captain of the army, who was with him, Go now to and fro through all the tribes of Israel, from Dan even to Beersheba, and number ye the people, that I may know the sum of the people.
And Joab said to the king, Now Jehovah thy God add to the people, however many they may be, a hundredfold, and may the eyes of my lord the king see it, but why does my lord the king delight in this thing?
Notwithstanding, the king's word prevailed against Joab, and against the captains of the army. And Joab and the captains of the army went out from the presence of the king to number the people of Israel.
And they passed over the Jordan, and encamped in Aroer on the right side of the city that is in the middle of the valley of Gad, and to Jazer.
Then they came to Gilead, and to the land of Tahtim-hodshi. And they came to Dan-jaan, and round about to Sidon,
and came to the stronghold of Tyre, and to all the cities of the Hivites, and of the Canaanites. And they went out to the south of Judah, at Beersheba.
So when they had gone to and fro through all the land, they came to Jerusalem at the end of nine months and twenty days.
And Joab gave the sum of the numbering of the people to the king. And there were in Israel eight hundred thousand valiant men who drew the sword, and the men of Judah were five hundred thousand men.
And David's heart smote him after he had numbered the people. And David said to Jehovah, I have sinned greatly in that which I have done, but now, O Jehovah, put away, I beseech thee, the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly.
And when David rose up in the morning, the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Gad, David's seer, saying,
Go and speak to David, Thus says Jehovah, I offer thee three things. Choose thee one of them, that I may do it to thee.
So Gad came to David, and told him, and said to him, Shall seven years of famine come to thee in thy land? Or will thou flee three months before thy foes while they pursue thee? Or shall there be three days' pestilence in thy land? Now decide, and see what answer I shall return to him who sent me.
And David said to Gad, I am in a great strait. Let us fall now into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercies are great, and let me not fall into the hand of man.
So Jehovah sent a pestilence upon Israel from the morning even to the time appointed. And there died of the people from Dan even to Beersheba seventy thousand men.
And when the agent stretched out his hand toward Jerusalem to destroy it, Jehovah relented of the evil, and said to the agent who destroyed the people, It is enough. Now stay thy hand. And the agent of Jehovah was by the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.
And David spoke to Jehovah when he saw the agent who smote the people, and said, Lo, I have sinned, and I have done perversely, but these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, be against me, and against my father's house.
And Gad came that day to David, and said to him, Go up, rear an altar to Jehovah in the threshing-floor of Araunah the Jebusite.
And David went up according to the saying of Gad, as Jehovah commanded.
And Araunah looked forth, and saw the king and his servants coming on toward him. And Araunah went out, and bowed himself before the king with his face to the ground.
And Araunah said, Why has my lord the king come to his servant? And David said, To buy the threshing-floor from thee, to build an altar to Jehovah that the plague may be halted from the people.
And Araunah said to David, Let my lord the king take and offer up what seems good to him. Behold, the oxen for the burnt offering, and the threshing instruments and the yokes of the oxen for the wood.
All this, O king, Araunah gives to the king. And Araunah said to the king, Jehovah thy God accept thee.
And the king said to Araunah, No, but I will truly buy it from thee at a price. Neither will I offer burnt offerings to Jehovah my God which cost me nothing. So David bought the threshing-floor and the oxen for fifty shekels of silver.
And David built there an altar to Jehovah, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings. So Jehovah was entreated for the land, and the plague was halted from Israel.

I Kings

Now king David was old and stricken in years, and they covered him with clothes, but he did not get warm.
Therefore his servants said to him, Let there be sought for my lord the king a young virgin. And let her stand before the king, and take care of him. And let her lie in thy bosom, that my lord the king may get warmth.
So they sought for a fair damsel throughout all the borders of Israel, and found Abishag the Shunammite, and brought her to the king.
And the damsel was very fair. And she took care of the king, and ministered to him, but the king knew her not.
Then Adonijah the son of Haggith exalted himself, saying, I will be king. And he prepared chariots for him, and horsemen, and fifty men to run before him.
And his father had not displeased him at any time in saying, Why have thou done so? And he was also a very handsome man. And he was born after Absalom.
And he conferred with Joab the son of Zeruiah, and with Abiathar the priest. And, following Adonijah, they helped him.
But Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and Nathan the prophet, and Shimei, and Rei, and the mighty men who belonged to David, were not with Adonijah.
And Adonijah killed sheep and oxen and fatlings by the stone of Zoheleth, which is beside En-rogel. And he called all his brothers, the king's sons, and all the men of Judah, the king's servants.
But he did not call Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah, and the mighty men, and Solomon his brother.
Then Nathan spoke to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon, saying, Have thou not heard that Adonijah the son of Haggith reigns, and David our lord does not know it?
Now therefore come, let me, I pray thee, give thee counsel, that thou may save thine own life, and the life of thy son Solomon.
Go and get thee in to king David, and say to him, Did thou not, my lord, O king, swear to thy handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne? Why then does Adonijah reign?
Behold, while thou yet talk there with the king, I also will come in after thee, and confirm thy words.
And Bathsheba went in to the king into the chamber. And the king was very old, and Abishag the Shunammite was ministering to the king.
And Bathsheba bowed, and did obeisance to the king. And the king said, What do thou want?
And she said to him, My lord, thou swore by Jehovah thy God to thy handmaid, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne.
And now, behold, Adonijah reigns, and thou, my lord the king, do not know it.
And he has slain oxen and fatlings and sheep in abundance, and has called all the sons of the king, and Abiathar the priest, and Joab the captain of the army, but he has not called Solomon thy servant.
And thou, my lord the king, the eyes of all Israel are upon thee, that thou should tell them who shall sit on the throne of my lord the king after him.
Otherwise it will come to pass, when my lord the king shall sleep with his fathers, that I and my son Solomon shall be considered offenders.
And, lo, while she yet talked with the king, Nathan the prophet came in.
And they told the king, saying, Behold, Nathan the prophet. And when he came in before the king, he bowed himself before the king with his face to the ground.
And Nathan said, My lord, O king, have thou said, Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne?
For he has gone down this day, and has slain oxen and fatlings and sheep in abundance, and has called all the king's sons, and the captains of the army, and Abiathar the priest. And, behold, they are eating and drinking before him, and say, Live, king Adonijah.
But me, even me thy servant, and Zadok the priest, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and thy servant Solomon, he has not called.
Is this thing done by my lord the king, and thou have not shown to thy servants who should sit on the throne of my lord the king after him?
Then king David answered and said, Call Bathsheba to me. And she came into the king's presence, and stood before the king.
And the king swore, and said, As Jehovah lives, who has redeemed my soul out of all adversity,
truly as I swore to thee by Jehovah, the God of Israel, saying, Assuredly Solomon thy son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my throne in my stead. Surely so I will do this day.
Then Bathsheba bowed with her face to the earth, and did obeisance to the king, and said, Let my lord king David live forever.
And king David said, Call to me Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And they came before the king.
And the king said to them, Take with you the servants of your lord, and cause Solomon my son to ride upon my own mule, and bring him down to Gihon.
And let Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet anoint him there king over Israel. And blow ye the trumpet, and say, Live, king Solomon.
Then ye shall come up after him, and he shall come and sit upon my throne, for he shall be king in my stead. And I have appointed him to be prince over Israel and over Judah.
And Benaiah the son of Jehoiada answered the king, and said, Truly. Jehovah, the God of my lord the king, say so too.
As Jehovah has been with my lord the king, even so be he with Solomon, and make his throne greater than the throne of my lord king David.
So Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites, went down, and caused Solomon to ride upon king David's mule, and brought him to Gihon.
And Zadok the priest took the horn of oil out of the tent, and anointed Solomon. And they blew the trumpet, and all the people said, Live, king Solomon.
And all the people came up after him, and the people piped with pipes, and rejoiced with great joy, so that the earth quivered with the sound of them.
And Adonijah and all the guests who were with him heard it as they had made an end of eating. And when Joab heard the sound of the trumpet, he said, Why is this noise of the city being in an uproar?
While he yet spoke, behold, Jonathan the son of Abiathar the priest came. And Adonijah said, Come in, for thou are a worthy man, and bring good news.
And Jonathan answered and said to Adonijah, Truly our lord king David has made Solomon king.
And the king has sent with him Zadok the priest, and Nathan the prophet, and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and the Cherethites and the Pelethites. And they have caused him to ride upon the king's mule.
And Zadok the priest and Nathan the prophet have anointed him king in Gihon. And they have come up from there rejoicing, so that the city rang again. This is the noise that ye have heard.
And also Solomon sits on the throne of the kingdom.
And moreover the king's servants came to bless our lord king David, saying, Thy God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and make his throne greater than thy throne. And the king bowed himself upon the bed.
And also thus said the king, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who has given one of my seed to sit on my throne this day, my eyes even seeing it.
And all the guests of Adonijah were afraid, and rose up, and every man went his way.
And Adonijah feared because of Solomon. And he arose, and went, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.
And it was told Solomon, saying, Behold, Adonijah fears king Solomon, for, lo, he has laid hold on the horns of the altar, saying, Let king Solomon swear to me first that he will not kill his servant with the sword.
And Solomon said, If he shall show himself a worthy man, there shall not a hair of him fall to the earth, but if wickedness be found in him, he shall die.
So king Solomon sent, and they brought him down from the altar. And he came and did obeisance to king Solomon. And Solomon said to him, Go to thy house.

Now the days of David drew near that he should die. And he charged Solomon his son, saying,
I am going the way of all the earth. Be thou strong therefore, and show thyself a man,
and keep the charge of Jehovah thy God, to walk in his ways, to keep his statutes, and his commandments, and his ordinances, and his testimonies, according to that which is written in the law of Moses, that thou may prosper in all that thou do, and wherever thou turn thyself.
That Jehovah may establish his word which he spoke concerning me, saying, If thy sons take heed to their way, to walk before me in truth with all their heart and with all their soul, there shall not fail thee a man on the throne of Israel.
Moreover thou also know what Joab the son of Zeruiah did to me, even what he did to the two captains of the armies of Israel, to Abner the son of Ner, and to Amasa the son of Jether, whom he killed, and shed the blood of war in peace, and put the blood of war upon his belt that was about his loins, and in his shoes that were on his feet.
Do therefore according to thy wisdom, and do not let his hoar head go down to Sheol in peace.
But show kindness to the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and let them be of those who eat at thy table, for so they came to me when I fled from Absalom thy brother.
And, behold, there is with thee Shimei the son of Gera, the Benjamite, of Bahurim, who cursed me with a grievous curse in the day when I went to Mahanaim. But he came down to meet me at the Jordan, and I swore to him by Jehovah, saying, I will not put thee to death with the sword.
Now therefore do not hold him guiltless, for thou are a wise man, and thou will know what thou ought to do to him, and thou shall bring his hoar head down to Sheol with blood.
And David slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David.
And the days that David reigned over Israel were forty years. He reigned seven years in Hebron, and he reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
And Solomon sat upon the throne of David his father, and his kingdom was established greatly.
Then Adonijah the son of Haggith came to Bathsheba the mother of Solomon. And she said, Do thou come peaceably? And he said, Peaceably.
He said moreover, I have something to say to thee. And she said, Say on.
And he said, Thou know that the kingdom was mine, and that all Israel set their faces on me, that I should reign. However the kingdom is turned about, and has become my brother's, for it was his from Jehovah.
And now I ask one petition of thee; do not deny me. And she said to him, Say on.
And he said, Speak, I pray thee, to Solomon the king (for he will not say no thee), that he give me Abishag the Shunammite to wife.
And Bathsheba said, Well, I will speak for thee to the king.
Bathsheba therefore went to king Solomon to speak to him for Adonijah. And the king rose up to meet her, and bowed himself to her, and sat down on his throne, and caused a throne to be set for the king's mother. And she sat on his right hand.
Then she said, I ask one small petition of thee; do not deny me. And the king said to her, Ask on, my mother, for I will not deny thee.
And she said, Let Abishag the Shunammite be given to Adonijah thy brother to wife.
And king Solomon answered and said to his mother, And why do thou ask Abishag the Shunammite for Adonijah? Ask for him the kingdom also, for he is my elder brother, even for him, and for Abiathar the priest, and for Joab the son of Zeruiah.
Then king Solomon swore by Jehovah, saying, God do so to me, and more also, if Adonijah has not spoken this word against his own life.
Now therefore as Jehovah lives, who has established me, and set me on the throne of David my father, and who has made me a house as he promised, surely Adonijah shall be put to death this day.
And king Solomon sent by Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and he fell upon him so that he died.
And the king said to Abiathar the priest, Get thee to Anathoth, to thine own fields, for thou are worthy of death. But I will not at this time put thee to death, because thou bore the ark of the lord Jehovah before David my father, and because thou were afflicted in all wherein my father was afflicted.
So Solomon thrust out Abiathar from being priest to Jehovah, that he might fulfill the word of Jehovah, which he spoke concerning the house of Eli in Shiloh.
And the news came to Joab, for Joab had turned after Adonijah, though he did not turn after Absalom. And Joab fled to the tent of Jehovah, and caught hold on the horns of the altar.
And it was told king Solomon, Joab has fled to the tent of Jehovah, and, behold, he is by the altar. Then Solomon sent Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, saying, Go, fall upon him.
And Benaiah came to the tent of Jehovah, and said to him, Thus says the king, Come forth. And he said, No, but I will die here. And Benaiah brought the king word again, saying, Thus said Joab, and thus he answered me.
And the king said to him, Do as he has said, and fall upon him, and bury him, that thou may take away the blood, which Joab shed without cause, from me and from my father's house.
And Jehovah will return his blood upon his own head, because he fell upon two men more righteous and better than he, and killed them with the sword, and my father David did not know it, namely, Abner the son of Ner, captain of the army of Israel, and Amasa the son of Jether, captain of the army of Judah.
So shall their blood return upon the head of Joab, and upon the head of his seed forever. But to David, and to his seed, and to his house, and to his throne, there shall be peace forever from Jehovah.
Then Benaiah the son of Jehoiada went up, and fell upon him, and killed him. And he was buried in his own house in the wilderness.
And the king put Benaiah the son of Jehoiada in his room over the army. And the king put Zadok the priest in the place of Abiathar.
And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said to him, Build for thee a house in Jerusalem, and dwell there, and go not forth from there anywhere.
For on the day thou go out, and pass over the brook Kidron, know thou for certain that thou shall surely die; thy blood shall be upon thine own head.
And Shimei said to the king, The saying is good. As my lord the king has said, so will thy servant do. And Shimei dwelt in Jerusalem many days.
And it came to pass at the end of three years, that two of the servants of Shimei ran away to Achish, son of Maacah, king of Gath. And they told Shimei, saying, Behold, thy servants are in Gath.
And Shimei arose, and saddled his donkey, and went to Gath to Achish to seek his servants. And Shimei went, and brought his servants from Gath.
And it was told Solomon that Shimei had gone from Jerusalem to Gath, and was come again.
And the king sent and called for Shimei, and said to him, Did I not adjure thee by Jehovah, and protest to thee, saying, Know for certain, that on the day thou go out, and walk abroad anywhere, thou shall surely die? And thou said to me, The saying that I have heard is good.
Why then have thou not kept the oath of Jehovah, and the commandment that I have charged thee with?
The king said moreover to Shimei, Thou know all the iniquity which thy heart is privy to, what thou did to David my father. Therefore Jehovah shall return thy iniquity upon thine own head.
But king Solomon shall be blessed, and the throne of David shall be established before Jehovah forever.
So the king commanded Benaiah the son of Jehoiada. And he went out, and fell upon him so that he died. And the kingdom was established in the hand of Solomon.

And Solomon made affinity with Pharaoh king of Egypt, and took Pharaoh's daughter, and brought her into the city of David until he had made an end of building his own house, and the house of Jehovah, and the wall of Jerusalem round about.
Only the people sacrificed in the high places, because there was no house built for the name of Jehovah until those days.
And Solomon loved Jehovah, walking in the statutes of David his father. Only he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
And the king went to Gibeon to sacrifice there, for that was the great high place. Solomon offered a thousand burnt offerings upon that altar.
In Gibeon Jehovah appeared to Solomon in a dream by night, and God said, Ask what I shall give thee.
And Solomon said, Thou have shown to thy servant David my father great loving kindness, according as he walked before thee in truth, and in righteousness, and in uprightness of heart with thee. And thou have kept for him this great loving kindness, that thou have given him a son to sit on his throne as it is this day.
And now, O Jehovah my God, thou have made thy servant king instead of David my father. And I am but a little child; I know not how to go out or come in.
And thy servant is in the midst of thy people which thou have chosen, a great people that cannot be numbered nor counted for multitude.
Give thy servant therefore an understanding heart to judge thy people, that I may discern between good and evil, for who is able to judge this thy great people?
And the speech pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing.
And God said to him, Because thou have asked this thing, and have not asked for thyself long life, neither have asked riches for thyself, nor have asked the life of thine enemies, but have asked for thyself understanding to discern justice,
behold, I have done according to thy word. Lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, so that there has been none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like thee.
And I have also given thee that which thou have not asked, both riches and honor, so that there shall not be any among the kings like thee all thy days.
And if thou will walk in my ways, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as thy father David walked, then I will lengthen thy days.
And Solomon awoke, and, behold, it was a dream. And he came to Jerusalem, and stood before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and offered up burnt offerings, and offered peace offerings, and made a feast to all his servants.
Then two women who were harlots came to the king, and stood before him.
And the one woman said, Oh, my lord, I and this woman dwell in one house. And I was delivered of a child with her in the house.
And it came to pass the third day after I was delivered, that this woman was delivered also. And we were together; there was no stranger with us in the house, except we two in the house.
And this woman's child died in the night, because she lay upon it.
And she arose at midnight, and took my son from beside me while thy handmaid slept, and laid it in her bosom, and laid her dead child in my bosom.
And when I rose in the morning to give my child suck, behold, it was dead. But when I had looked at it in the morning, behold, it was not my son whom I bore.
And the other woman said, No, but the living is my son, and the dead is thy son. And the other woman said, No, but the dead is thy son, and the living is my son. Thus they spoke before the king.
Then the king said, The one says, This is my son that lives, and thy son is the dead. And the other says, No, but thy son is the dead, and my son is the living.
And the king said, Fetch me a sword. And they brought a sword before the king.
And the king said, Divide the living child in two, and give half to the one, and half to the other.
Then the woman whose the living child was spoke to the king, for her heart yearned over her son, and she said, Oh, my lord, give her the living child, and by no means kill it. But the other said, It shall be neither mine nor thine. Divide it.
Then the king answered and said, Give her the living child, and by no means kill it; she is the mother of it.
And all Israel heard of the judgment which the king had judged. And they feared the king, for they saw that the wisdom of God was in him, to do justice.

And king Solomon was king over all Israel.
Azariah the son of Zadok, the priest;
Elihoreph and Ahijah, the sons of Shisha, scribes; Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, the recorder;
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the army; and Zadok and Abiathar were priests;
and Azariah the son of Nathan was over the officers; and Zabud the son of Nathan was chief minister, and the king's friend;
and Ahishar was over the household; and Adoniram the son of Abda was over the men subject to task work.
And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel who provided provisions for the king and his household. Each man had to make provision for a month in the year.
Ben-hur, in the hill-country of Ephraim;
Ben-deker, in Makaz, and in Shaalbim, and Beth-shemesh, and Elon-beth-hanan;
Ben-hesed, in Arubboth (to him pertained Socoh, and all the land of Hepher);
Ben-abinadab, in all the height of Dor (he had Taphath the daughter of Solomon to wife);
Baana the son of Ahilud, in Taanach and Megiddo, and all Beth-shean which is beside Zarethan, beneath Jezreel, from Beth-shean to Abel-meholah, as far as beyond Jokmeam;
Ben-geber, in Ramoth-gilead (to him pertained the towns of Jair the son of Manasseh, which are in Gilead; even to him pertained the region of Argob, which is in Bashan, sixty great cities with walls and brazen bars);
Ahinadab the son of Iddo, in Mahanaim;
Ahimaaz, in Naphtali (he also took Basemath the daughter of Solomon to wife);
Baana the son of Hushai, in Asher and Bealoth;
Jehoshaphat the son of Paruah, in Issachar;
Shimei the son of Ela, in Benjamin;
Geber the son of Uri, in the land of Gilead, the country of Sihon king of the Amorites and of Og king of Bashan, and he was the only officer who was in the land.
Judah and Israel were as many as the sand which is by the sea in multitude, eating and drinking and making merry.
And Solomon ruled over all the kingdoms from the River to the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt. They brought tribute, and served Solomon all the days of his life.
And Solomon's provision for one day was thirty measures of fine flour, and sixty measures of meal,
ten fat oxen, and twenty oxen out of the pastures, and a hundred sheep, besides harts, and gazelles, and roebucks, and fatted fowl.
For he had dominion over all the region on this side the River, from Tiphsah even to Gaza, over all the kings on this side of the River. And he had peace on all sides round about him.
And Judah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his vine and under his fig tree, from Dan even to Beersheba, all the days of Solomon.
And Solomon had forty thousand stalls of horses for his chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen.
And those officers provided provisions for king Solomon, and for all who came to king Solomon's table, every man in his month; they let nothing be lacking.
Barley also and straw for the horses and swift steeds they brought to the place where the officers were, every man according to his charge.
And God gave Solomon exceedingly much wisdom and understanding, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that is on the sea-shore.
And Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom of all the sons of the east, and all the wisdom of Egypt.
than Ethan the Ezrahite, and Heman, and Calcol, and Darda, the sons of Mahol. And his fame was in all the nations round about.
And he spoke three thousand proverbs, and his songs were a thousand and five.
And he spoke of trees, from the cedar that is in Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the wall. He spoke also of beasts, and of birds, and of creeping things, and of fishes.
And there came of all peoples to hear the wisdom of Solomon, from all kings of the earth who had heard of his wisdom.

And Hiram king of Tyre sent his servants to Solomon, for he had heard that they had anointed him king in the place of his father, for Hiram was ever a devotee of David.
And Solomon sent to Hiram, saying,
Thou know how that David my father could not build a house for the name of Jehovah his God for the wars which were about him on every side, until Jehovah put them under the soles of his feet.
But now Jehovah my God has given me rest on every side; there is neither adversary, nor evil occurrence.
And, behold, I purpose to build a house for the name of Jehovah my God, as Jehovah spoke to David my father, saying, Thy son, whom I will set upon thy throne in thy place, he shall build the house for my name.
Now therefore command thou that they cut for me cedar trees out of Lebanon. And my servants shall be with thy servants. And I will give thee wages for thy servants according to all that thou shall say, for thou know that there is not among us any that knows how to cut timber like the Sidonians.
And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon, that he rejoiced greatly, and said, Blessed be Jehovah this day, who has given to David a wise son over this great people.
And Hiram sent to Solomon, saying, I have heard that which thou have sent to me. I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning timber of fir.
My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon to the sea. And I will make them into rafts to go by sea to the place that thou shall appoint me, and will cause them to be broken up there, and thou shall receive them. And thou shall accomplish my desire in giving food for my household.
So Hiram gave Solomon timber of cedar and timber of fir according to all his desire.
And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to his household, and twenty measures of pure oil; thus Solomon gave to Hiram year by year.
And Jehovah gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him. And there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and the two made a league together.
And king Solomon raised a conscription out of all Israel, and the conscription was thirty thousand men.
And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses. They were in Lebanon a month, and at home two months. And Adoniram was over the men subject to task work.
And Solomon had seventy thousand who bore burdens, and eighty thousand who were hewers in the mountains,
three thousand and three hundred who bore rule over the people that labored in the work.
And the king commanded, and they hewed out great stones, costly stones, to lay the foundation of the house with shaped stone.
And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders and the Gebalites fashioned them, and prepared the timber and the stones to build the house.

And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the sons of Israel came out of the land of Egypt, in the fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel, in the month Ziv, which is the second month, that he began to build the house of Jehovah.
And the house which king Solomon built for Jehovah, the length of it was sixty cubits, and the breadth of it twenty, and the height of it thirty cubits,
and the porch in front of the temple of the house, twenty cubits was the length of it, according to the breadth of the house, and ten cubits was the breadth of it in front of the house.
And he made windows of fixed lattice-work for the house.
And against the wall of the house he built stories round about, against the walls of the house round about, both of the temple and of the oracle. And he made side-chambers round about.
The lowest story was five cubits broad, and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits broad, for on the outside he made offsets in the wall of the house round about, that the beams should not be fastened in the walls of the house.
And the house, when it was being built, was built of stone made ready at the quarry. And there was neither hammer nor axe nor any tool of iron heard in the house, while it was being built.
The door for the middle side-chambers was in the right side of the house. And they went up by winding stairs into the middle story, and out of the middle into the third.
So he built the house, and finished it. And he covered the house with beams and planks of cedar.
and they rested on the house with timber of cedar.
And the word of Jehovah came to Solomon, saying,
Concerning this house that thou are building, if thou will walk in my statutes, and execute my ordinances, and keep all my commandments to walk in them, then I will establish my word with thee, which I spoke to David thy father.
And I will dwell among the sons of Israel, and will not forsake my people Israel.
So Solomon built the house, and finished it.
And he built the walls of the house inside with boards of cedar. From the floor of the house to the walls of the ceiling, he covered them on the inside with wood. And he covered the floor of the house with boards of fir.
And he built twenty cubits on the hinder part of the house with boards of cedar from the floor to the walls of the ceiling. He built them for it inside, for an oracle, even for the most holy place.
And the house, that is, the temple in front of the oracle, was forty cubits long.
And there was cedar on the house inside, carved with knops and open flowers. All was cedar; there was no stone seen.
And he prepared an oracle in the midst of the house inside, to set there the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
And inside the oracle was a space of twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty cubits in the height of it. And he overlaid it with pure gold. And he covered the altar with cedar.
So Solomon overlaid the house inside with pure gold. And he drew chains of gold across before the oracle, and he overlaid it with gold.
And the whole house he overlaid with gold until all the house was finished. Also the whole altar that belonged to the oracle he overlaid with gold.
And in the oracle he made two cherubim of olive-wood, each ten cubits high.
And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub, and five cubits the other wing of the cherub. From the outermost part of the one wing to the outermost part of the other were ten cubits.
And the other cherub was ten cubits; both of the cherubim were of one measure and one form.
The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and so it was of the other cherub.
And he set the cherubim inside the inner house. And the wings of the cherubim were stretched forth, so that the wing of the one touched the one wall, and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall. And their wings touched each another in the middle of the house.
And he overlaid the cherubim with gold.
And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved figures of cherubim and palm trees and open flowers, inside and outside.
And the floor of the house he overlaid with gold, inside and outside.
And for the entrance of the oracle he made doors of olive-wood. The lintel and door-posts were a fifth part of the wall.
So he made two doors of olive-wood. And he carved upon them carvings of cherubim and palm trees and open flowers, and overlaid them with gold. And he spread the gold upon the cherubim, and upon the palm trees.
So he also made for the entrance of the temple door-posts of olive-wood out of a fourth part of the wall,
and two doors of fir-wood. The two leaves of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the other door were folding.
And he carved thereon cherubim and palm trees and open flowers. And he overlaid them with gold fitted upon the graven work.
And he built the inner court with three courses of hewn stone, and a course of cedar beams.
In the fourth year the foundation of the house of Jehovah was laid, in the month Ziv.
And in the eleventh year, in the month Bul, which is the eighth month, the house was finished throughout all the parts of it, and according to all the fashion of it. So he was seven years in building it.

And Solomon was thirteen years building his own house, and he finished all his house.
For he built the house of the forest of Lebanon. The length of it was a hundred cubits, and the breadth of it fifty cubits, and the height of it thirty cubits, upon four rows of cedar pillars, with cedar beams upon the pillars.
And it was covered with cedar above over the forty-five beams that were upon the pillars, fifteen in a row.
And there were beams in three rows, and window was opposite window in three ranks.
And all the doors and posts were made square with beams, and window was opposite window in three ranks.
And he made the porch of pillars. The length of it was fifty cubits, and the breadth of it thirty cubits, and a porch in front of them, and pillars and a threshold in front of them.
And he made the porch of the throne where he was to judge, even the porch of judgment. And it was covered with cedar from floor to floor.
And his house where he was to dwell, the other court within the porch was of the like work. He also made a house for Pharaoh's daughter (whom Solomon had taken to wife), like this porch.
All these were of costly stones, even of hewn stone, according to measure, sawed with saws, inside and outside, even from the foundation to the coping, and so on the outside to the great court.
And the foundation was of costly stones, even great stones, stones of ten cubits, and stones of eight cubits.
And above were costly stones, even hewn stone, according to measure, and cedar-wood.
And the great court round about had three courses of hewn stone, and a course of cedar beams, like the inner court of the house of Jehovah, and the porch of the house.
And king Solomon sent and fetched Hiram out of Tyre.
He was the son of a widow of the tribe of Naphtali, and his father was a man of Tyre, a workman in brass. And he was filled with wisdom and understanding and skill, to work all works in brass. And he came to king Solomon, and wrought all his work.
For he fashioned the two pillars of brass, eighteen cubits high apiece. And a line of twelve cubits encompassed each of them around.
And he made two capitals of molten brass to set upon the tops of the pillars. The height of the one capital was five cubits, and the height of the other capital was five cubits.
There were nets of checker-work, and wreaths of chain-work, for the capitals which were upon the top of the pillars; seven for the one capital, and seven for the other capital.
So he made the pillars. And there were two rows round about upon the one network to cover the capitals that were upon the top of the pillars. And so he did for the other capital.
And the capitals that were upon the top of the pillars in the porch were of lily-work, four cubits.
And there were capitals also above upon the two pillars, close by the protuberance which was beside the network. And the pomegranates were two hundred, in rows round about upon the other capital.
And he set up the pillars at the porch of the temple. And he set up the right pillar, and called the name of it Jachin, and he set up the left pillar, and called the name of it Boaz.
so was the work of the pillars finished.
And he made the molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass, and the height of it was five cubits. And a line of thirty cubits encompassed it round about.
And under the brim of it round about there were knops which encompassed it, for ten cubits, encompassing the sea round about. The knops were in two rows, cast when it was cast.
It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east. And the sea was set upon them above, and all their hinder parts were inward.
And it was a handbreadth thick. And the brim of it was wrought like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily. It held two thousand baths.
And he made the ten bases of brass; four cubits was the length of one base, and four cubits the breadth of it, and three cubits the height of it.
They had panels, and there were panels between the ledges.
And on the panels that were between the ledges were lions, oxen, and cherubim. And upon the ledges there was a pedestal above. And beneath the lions and oxen were wreaths of hanging work.
And every base had four brazen wheels, and axles of brass. And the four corners of it had supports. Beneath the laver were the molten supports with wreaths at the side of each.
And the mouth of it within the capital and above was a cubit. And the mouth of it was round after the work of a pedestal, a cubit and a half. And also upon the mouth of it were engravings. And their panels were foursquare, not round.
And the four wheels were underneath the panels. And the axletrees of the wheels were in the base. And the height of a wheel was a cubit and half a cubit.
And the work of the wheels was like the work of a chariot wheel. Their axletrees, and their felloes, and their spokes, and their naves, were all molten.
And there were four supports at the four corners of each base. The supports of it were of the base itself.
And in the top of the base there was a round band half a cubit high. And on the top of the base the ledges of it and the panels of it were of the same.
And on the plates of the ledges of it, and on the panels of it, he engraved cherubim, lions, and palm trees, according to the space of each, with wreaths round about.
all of them had one casting, one measure, and one form.
And he made ten basins of brass. One basin contained forty baths. And every basin was four cubits. And upon every one of the ten bases one basin.
And he set the bases, five on the right side of the house, and five on the left side of the house. And he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward, toward the south.
the two pillars, and the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars, and the two networks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars,
and the four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network, to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were upon the pillars,
and the ten bases, and the ten basins on the bases,
and the one sea, and the twelve oxen under the sea,
and the pots, and the shovels, and the bowls. And all these vessels, which Hiram made for king Solomon in the house of Jehovah were of burnished brass.
The king cast them in the plain of the Jordan, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zarethan.
And Solomon left all the vessels unweighed because they were very many; the weight of the brass could not be found out.
the golden altar, and the table whereupon the showbread was, of gold,
and the lampstands, five on the right side, and five on the left, before the oracle, of pure gold, and the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, of gold,
and the cups, and the snuffers, and the basins, and the spoons, and the firepans, of pure gold, and the hinges, both for the doors of the inner house, the most holy place, and for the doors of the house, namely, of the temple, of gold.
Thus all the work that king Solomon wrought in the house of Jehovah was finished. And Solomon brought in the things which David his father had dedicated-the silver, and the gold, and the vessels-and put them in the treasuries of the house of Jehovah.

Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the princes of the fathers of the sons of Israel, to king Solomon in Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the city of David, which is Zion.
And all the men of Israel assembled themselves to king Solomon at the feast, in the month Ethanim, which is the seventh month.
And all the elders of Israel came, and the priests took up the ark.
And they brought up the ark of Jehovah, and the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent; even these the priests and the Levites brought up.
And king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel, that were assembled to him, were with him before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen that could not be counted nor numbered for multitude.
And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.
For the cherubim spread forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and the staves of it above.
And the staves were so long that the ends of the staves were seen from the holy place before the oracle. But they were not seen outside. And there they are to this day.
There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets of stone which Moses put there at Horeb when Jehovah made a covenant with the sons of Israel, when they came out of the land of Egypt.
And it came to pass, when the priests came out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of Jehovah,
so that the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud, for the glory of Jehovah filled the house of Jehovah.
Then Solomon spoke, Jehovah has said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.
I have surely built thee a house of habitation, a place for thee to dwell in forever.
And the king turned his face around, and blessed all the assembly of Israel. And all the assembly of Israel stood.
And he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my father, and has with his hand fulfilled it, saying,
Since the day that I brought forth my people Israel out of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build a house, that my name might be there, but I chose David to be over my people Israel.
Now it was in the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
But Jehovah said to David my father, Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house for my name, thou did well that it was in thy heart.
Nevertheless thou shall not build the house, but thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for my name.
And Jehovah has established his word that he spoke, for I have risen up in the place of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as Jehovah promised, and have built the house for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
And there I have set a place for the ark, in which is the covenant of Jehovah, which he made with our fathers when he brought them out of the land of Egypt.
And Solomon stood before the altar of Jehovah in the presence of all the assembly of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven.
And he said, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven above, or on earth beneath, who keeps covenant and loving kindness with thy servants, who walk before thee with all their heart,
who have kept with thy servant David my father that which thou did promise him. Yea, thou spoke with thy mouth, and have fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this day.
Now therefore, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou have promised him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel, if only thy sons take heed to their way, to walk before me as thou have walked before me.
Now therefore, O God of Israel, let thy word, I pray thee, be verified, which thou spoke to thy servant David my father.
But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee. How much less this house that I have built!
Yet have thou respect to the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O Jehovah my God, to hearken to the cry and to the prayer which thy servant prays before thee this day,
that thine eyes may be open toward this house night and day, even toward the place whereof thou have said, My name shall be there, to hearken to the prayer which thy servant shall pray toward this place.
And hearken thou to the supplication of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place. Yea, hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place, and when thou hear, forgive.
If a man sins against his neighbor, and an oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear, and he comes and swears before thine altar in this house,
then hear thou in heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head, and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.
When thy people Israel are smitten down before the enemy because they have sinned against thee, if they turn again to thee, and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication to thee in this house,
then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again to the land which thou gave to their fathers.
When heaven is shut up, and there is no rain because they have sinned against thee, if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin when thou afflict them,
then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou teach them the good way wherein they should walk, and send rain upon thy land, which thou have given to thy people for an inheritance.
If there be famine in the land, if there be pestilence, if there be blight, mildew, locust or caterpillar, if their enemy besiege them in the land of their cities, whatever plague, whatever sickness there be,
whatever prayer and supplication be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, who shall know every man the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house,
then hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place, and forgive, and do, and render to every man according to all his ways, whose heart thou know (for thou, even thou only, know the hearts of all the sons of men),
that they may fear thee all the days that they live in the land which thou gave to our fathers.
Moreover concerning the foreigner who is not of thy people Israel, when he shall come out of a far country for thy name's sake
(for they shall hear of thy great name, and of thy mighty hand, and of thine outstretched arm), when he shall come and pray toward this house,
hear thou in heaven thy dwelling-place, and do according to all that the foreigner calls to thee for, that all the peoples of the earth may know thy name, to fear thee, as does thy people Israel, and that they may know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.
If thy people go out to battle against their enemy, by whatever way thou shall send them, and they pray to Jehovah toward the city which thou have chosen, and toward the house which I have built for thy name,
then hear thou in heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.
If they sin against thee (for there is no man that sins not), and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captive to the land of the enemy, afar off or near,
yet if they shall rethink themselves in the land where they are carried captive, and turn again, and make supplication to thee in the land of those who carried them captive, saying, We have sinned, and have done perversely, we have dealt wickedly,
if they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their enemies who carried them captive, and pray to thee toward their land, which thou gave to their fathers, the city which thou have chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name,
then hear thou their prayer and their supplication in heaven thy dwelling-place, and maintain their case,
and forgive thy people who have sinned against thee, and all their transgressions by which they have transgressed against thee, and give them compassion before those who carried them captive, that they may have compassion on them
(for they are thy people, and thine inheritance, which thou brought forth out of Egypt, from the midst of the furnace of iron);
that thine eyes may be open to the supplication of thy servant, and to the supplication of thy people Israel, to hearken to them whenever they cry to thee.
For thou separated them from among all the peoples of the earth, to be thine inheritance, as thou spoke by Moses thy servant when thou brought our fathers out of Egypt, O lord Jehovah.
And it was so, that, when Solomon had made an end of praying all this prayer and supplication to Jehovah, he arose from before the altar of Jehovah, from kneeling on his knees with his hands spread forth toward heaven.
And he stood, and blessed all the assembly of Israel with a loud voice, saying,
Blessed be Jehovah, who has given rest to his people Israel according to all that he promised. There has not failed one word of all his good promise, which he promised by Moses his servant.
Jehovah our God be with us as he was with our fathers. Let him not leave us, nor forsake us,
that he may incline our hearts to him, to walk in all his ways, and to keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his ordinances, which he commanded our fathers.
And let these my words, with which I have made supplication before Jehovah, be near to Jehovah our God day and night, that he maintain the cause of his servant, and the cause of his people Israel, as every day shall require,
that all the peoples of the earth may know that Jehovah, he is God; there is none else.
Let your heart therefore be perfect with Jehovah our God, to walk in his statutes, and to keep his commandments, as at this day.
And the king, and all Israel with him, offered sacrifice before Jehovah.
And Solomon offered for the sacrifice of peace offerings, which he offered to Jehovah, twenty-two thousand oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the sons of Israel dedicated the house of Jehovah.
The same day the king hallowed the middle of the court that was before the house of Jehovah, for there he offered the burnt offering, and the meal offering, and the fat of the peace offerings, because the brazen altar that was before Jehovah was too little to receive the burnt offering, and the meal offering, and the fat of the peace offerings.
So Solomon held the feast at that time, and all Israel with him, a great assembly, from the entrance of Hamath to the brook of Egypt, before Jehovah our God, seven days and seven days, even fourteen days.
On the eighth day he sent the people away. And they blessed the king, and went to their tents joyful and glad of heart for all the goodness that Jehovah had shown to David his servant, and to Israel his people.

And it came to pass, when Solomon had finished the building of the house of Jehovah, and the king's house, and all Solomon's desire which he was pleased to do,
that Jehovah appeared to Solomon the second time, as he had appeared to him at Gibeon.
And Jehovah said to him, I have heard thy prayer and thy supplication, which thou have made before me. I have hallowed this house, which thou have built, to put my name there forever. And my eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually.
And as for thee, if thou will walk before me, as David thy father walked, in integrity of heart, and in uprightness, to do according to all that I have commanded thee, and will keep my statutes and my ordinances,
then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom over Israel forever, according as I promised to David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man upon the throne of Israel.
But if ye shall turn away from following me, ye or your sons, and not keep my commandments and my statutes which I have set before you, but shall go and serve other gods, and worship them,
then will I cut off Israel out of the land which I have given them. And this house, which I have hallowed for my name, will I cast out of my sight. And Israel shall be a proverb and a byword among all peoples.
And though this house is so high, yet shall every man who passes by it be astonished, and shall hiss. And they shall say, Why has Jehovah done thus to this land, and to this house?
and they shall answer, Because they forsook Jehovah their God, who brought forth their fathers out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshiped them, and served them; therefore has Jehovah brought all this evil upon them.
And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, in which Solomon had built the two houses, the house of Jehovah and the king's house
(now Hiram the king of Tyre had furnished Solomon with cedar trees and fir trees, and with gold, according to all his desire), that king Solomon then gave Hiram twenty cities in the land of Galilee.
And Hiram came out from Tyre to see the cities which Solomon had given him. And they did not please him.
And he said, What cities are these which thou have given me, my brother? And he called them the land of Cabul to this day.
And Hiram sent to the king one hundred and twenty talents of gold.
to build the house of Jehovah, and his own house, and Millo, and the wall of Jerusalem, and Hazor, and Megiddo, and Gezer.
Pharaoh king of Egypt had gone up, and taken Gezer, and burnt it with fire, and slain the Canaanites who dwelt in the city, and given it for a portion to his daughter, Solomon's wife.
And Solomon built Gezer, and Beth-horon the nether,
and Baalath, and Tamar in the wilderness, in the land,
and all the store-cities that Solomon had, and the cities for his chariots, and the cities for his horsemen, and that which Solomon desired to build for his pleasure in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.
As for all the people who were left of the Amorites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Hivites, and the Jebusites, who were not of the sons of Israel,
their sons who were left after them in the land, whom the sons of Israel were not able utterly to destroy, of them Solomon raised a conscription of bondservants to this day.
But of the sons of Israel Solomon made no bondservants, but they were the men of war, and his servants, and his rulers, and his captains, and rulers of his chariots and of his horsemen.
These were the chief officers who were over Solomon's work, five hundred and fifty, who bore rule over the people that labored in the work.
But Pharaoh's daughter came up out of the city of David to her house which Solomon had built for her. Then he built Millo.
And three times a year Solomon offered burnt offerings and peace offerings upon the altar which he built to Jehovah, burning incense therewith, upon the altar that was before Jehovah. So he finished the house.
And king Solomon made a navy of ships in Ezion-geber, which is beside Eloth, on the shore of the Red Sea, in the land of Edom.
And Hiram sent in the navy his servants, shipmen who had knowledge of the sea, with the servants of Solomon.
And they came to Ophir, and fetched gold from there, four hundred and twenty talents, and brought it to king Solomon.

And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon concerning the name of Jehovah, she came to prove him with hard questions.
And she came to Jerusalem with a very great train, with camels that bore spices, and very much gold, and precious stones. And when she came to Solomon, she conversed with him of all that was in her heart.
And Solomon answered to her all her questions; there was not anything hid from the king which he did not answer.
And when the queen of Sheba had seen all the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,
and the food of his table, and the seating of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, and his cupbearers, and his ascent by which he went up to the house of Jehovah, there was no more spirit in her.
And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in my own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom.
However I did not believe the words until I came, and my eyes had seen it. And, behold, the half was not told me; thy wisdom and prosperity exceed the fame which I heard.
Happy are thy men, happy are these thy servants, who stand continually before thee, who hear thy wisdom.
Blessed be Jehovah thy God, who delighted in thee to set thee on the throne of Israel. Because Jehovah loved Israel forever, therefore he made thee king, to do justice and righteousness.
And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and of spices a very great store, and precious stones. There came no more such abundance of spices as these which the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
And the navy also of Hiram, that brought gold from Ophir, brought in from Ophir great plenty of almug trees and precious stones.
And the king made pillars of the almug trees for the house of Jehovah, and for the king's house, also harps and psalteries for the singers. There have come no such almug trees, nor were seen, to this day.
And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatever she asked, besides that which Solomon gave her of his royal bounty. So she turned, and went to her own land, she and her servants.
Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred sixty and six talents of gold,
besides that which the traders brought, and the traffic of the merchants, and of all the kings of Arabia, and of the governors of the country.
And king Solomon made two hundred bucklers of beaten gold; six hundred shekels of gold went to one buckler.
And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three pounds of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.
Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with the finest gold.
There were six steps to the throne, and the top of the throne was round behind. And there were supports on either side by the place of the seat, and two lions standing beside the supports.
And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom.
And all king Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold. None were of silver; it was accounted of nothing in the days of Solomon.
For the king had at sea a navy of Tarshish with the navy of Hiram. Once every three years the navy of Tarshish came, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.
So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches and in wisdom.
And all the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.
And every man brought his tribute, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, and armor, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.
And Solomon gathered together chariots and horsemen. And he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, that he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.
And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars he made to be as the sycamore trees that are in the lowland, for abundance.
And the horses which Solomon had were brought out of Egypt. And the king's merchants received them in herds, each herd at a price.
And a chariot came up and went out of Egypt for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty. And so for all the kings of the Hittites, and for the kings of Syria, they brought them out by their means.

Now king Solomon loved many foreign women, together with the daughter of Pharaoh, women of the Moabites, Ammonites, Edomites, Sidonians, and Hittites,
of the nations concerning which Jehovah said to the sons of Israel, Ye shall not go among them, neither shall they come among you, for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods. Solomon clave to these in love.
And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred concubines. And his wives turned away his heart.
For it came to pass, when Solomon was old, that his wives turned away his heart after other gods. And his heart was not perfect with Jehovah his God as was the heart of David his father.
For Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians, and after Milcom the abomination of the Ammonites.
And Solomon did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and went not fully after Jehovah as did David his father.
Then Solomon built a high place for Chemosh the abomination of Moab on the mount that is before Jerusalem, and for Molech the abomination of the sons of Ammon.
And so he did for all his foreign wives, who burnt incense and sacrificed to their gods.
And Jehovah was angry with Solomon because his heart was turned away from Jehovah, the God of Israel, who had appeared to him twice,
and had commanded him concerning this thing, that he should not go after other gods. But he did not keep that which Jehovah commanded.
Therefore Jehovah said to Solomon, Forasmuch as this is done by thee, and thou have not kept my covenant and my statutes, which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to thy servant.
Notwithstanding I will not do it in thy days, for David thy father's sake, but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son.
However I will not rend away all the kingdom, but I will give one tribe to thy son, for David my servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake which I have chosen.
And Jehovah raised up an adversary to Solomon, Hadad the Edomite. He was of the king's seed in Edom.
For it came to pass, when David was in Edom, and Joab the captain of the army was gone up to bury the slain, and had smitten every male in Edom
(for Joab and all Israel remained there six months until he had cut off every male in Edom),
that Hadad fled, he and certain Edomites of his father's servants with him, to go into Egypt, Hadad being yet a little child.
And they arose out of Midian, and came to Paran. And they took men with them out of Paran, and they came to Egypt, to Pharaoh king of Egypt, who gave him a house, and appointed him provisions, and gave him land.
And Hadad found great favor in the sight of Pharaoh, so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of Tahpenes the queen.
And the sister of Tahpenes bore him Genubath his son, whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house. And Genubath was in Pharaoh's house among the sons of Pharaoh.
And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers, and that Joab the captain of the army was dead, Hadad said to Pharaoh, Let me depart that I may go to my own country.
Then Pharaoh said to him, But what have thou lacked with me, that, behold, thou seek to go to thine own country? And he answered, Nothing, however only let me depart.
And God raised up another adversary to him, Rezon the son of Eliada, who had fled from his lord Hadadezer king of Zobah.
And he gathered men to him, and became captain over a troop when David killed them of Zobah. And they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in Damascus.
And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon, besides the mischief that Hadad did. And he abhorred Israel, and reigned over Syria.
And Jeroboam the son of Nebat, an Ephraimite of Zeredah, a servant of Solomon whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow, he also lifted up his hand against the king.
Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breach of the city of David his father.
And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valor. And Solomon saw the young man that he was industrious, and he gave him charge over all the labor of the house of Joseph.
And it came to pass at that time, when Jeroboam went out of Jerusalem, that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way. Now Ahijah had clad himself with a new garment, and the two were alone in the field.
And Ahijah laid hold of the new garment that was on him, and tore it in twelve pieces.
And he said to Jeroboam, Take thee ten pieces, for thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Behold, I will rend the kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and will give ten tribes to thee
(but he shall have one tribe, for my servant David's sake and for Jerusalem's sake, the city which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel),
because that they have forsaken me, and have worshiped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Sidonians, Chemosh the god of Moab, and Milcom the god of the sons of Ammon. And they have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in my eyes, and to keep my statutes and my ordinances as David his father did.
However I will not take the whole kingdom out of his hand, but I will make him prince all the days of his life, for David my servant's sake whom I chose, who kept my commandments and my statutes.
But I will take the kingdom out of his son's hand, and will give it to thee, even ten tribes.
And I will give one tribe to his son, that David my servant may have a lamp always before me in Jerusalem, the city which I have chosen for me to put my name there.
And I will take thee, and thou shall reign according to all that thy soul desires, and shall be king over Israel.
And it shall be, if thou will hearken to all that I command thee, and will walk in my ways, and do that which is right in my eyes, to keep my statutes and my commandments, as David my servant did. That I will be with thee, and will build thee a sure house as I built for David, and will give Israel to thee.
And for this I will afflict the seed of David, but not forever.
Solomon therefore sought to kill Jeroboam. But Jeroboam arose, and fled into Egypt, to Shishak king of Egypt, and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon.
Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and his wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon?
And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel was forty years.
And Solomon slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David his father. And Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

And Rehoboam went to Shechem, for all Israel came to Shechem to make him king.
And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it (for he was yet in Egypt where he had fled from the presence of king Solomon, and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt,
and they sent and called him), that Jeroboam and all the assembly of Israel came, and spoke to Rehoboam, saying,
Thy father made our yoke grievous. Now therefore make thou lighter the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, and we will serve thee.
And he said to them, Depart yet for three days, then come again to me. And the people departed.
And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men who had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel give ye to me to return an answer to this people?
And they spoke to him, saying, If thou will be a servant to this people this day, and will serve them, and answer them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants forever.
But he forsook the counsel of the old men, which they had given him, and took counsel with the young men that grew up with him, who stood before him.
And he said to them, What counsel give ye, that we may return an answer to this people who have spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke that thy father put upon us lighter?
And the young men that grew up with him spoke to him, saying, Thus shall thou say to this people that spoke to thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter to us; thus shall thou speak to them, My little finger is thicker than my father's loins.
And now whereas my father burdened you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.
So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come to me again the third day.
And the king answered the people roughly, and forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given him,
and spoke to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.
So the king did not hearken to the people, for it was a thing brought about by Jehovah, that he might establish his word, which Jehovah spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
And when all Israel saw that the king did not hearken to them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? Neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse. To your tents, O Israel. Now see to thine own house, David. So Israel departed to their tents.
But as for the sons of Israel who dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.
Then king Rehoboam sent Adoram who was over the men subject to task work. And all Israel stoned him to death with stones. And king Rehoboam made speed to get up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.
So Israel rebelled against the house of David to this day.
And it came to pass, when all Israel heard that Jeroboam was returned, that they sent and called him to the congregation, and made him king over all Israel. There was none that followed the house of David, but only the tribe of Judah.
And when Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he assembled all the house of Judah, and the tribe of Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand chosen men, who were warriors, to fight against the house of Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam the son of Solomon.
But the word of God came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
Speak to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all the house of Judah and Benjamin, and to the rest of the people, saying,
Thus says Jehovah, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brothers the sons of Israel. Return every man to his house, for this thing is of me. So they hearkened to the word of Jehovah, and returned and went their way according to the word of Jehovah.
Then Jeroboam built Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim, and dwelt therein. And he went out from there, and built Penuel.
And Jeroboam said in his heart, Now the kingdom will return to the house of David.
If this people go up to offer sacrifices in the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem, then the heart of this people will turn again to their lord, even to Rehoboam king of Judah. And they will kill me, and return to Rehoboam king of Judah.
Whereupon the king took counsel, and made two calves of gold. And he said to them, It is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem. Behold thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.
And he set the one in Bethel, and the other he put in Dan.
And this thing became a sin, for the people went to worship before the one, even to Dan.
And he made houses of high places, and made priests from among all the people who were not of the sons of Levi.
And Jeroboam ordained a feast in the eighth month, on the fifteenth day of the month, like the feast that is in Judah, and he went up to the altar. So he did in Bethel, sacrificing to the calves that he had made. And he placed in Bethel the priests of the high places that he had made.
And he went up to the altar which he had made in Bethel on the fifteenth day in the eighth month, even in the month which he had devised of his own heart. And he ordained a feast for the sons of Israel, and went up to the altar to burn incense.

And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah by the word of Jehovah to Bethel. And Jeroboam was standing by the altar to burn incense.
Behold, a son shall be born to the house of David, Josiah by name. And upon thee shall he sacrifice the priests of the high places that burn incense upon thee, and men's bones they shall burn upon thee.
Behold, the altar shall be torn, and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured out.
And it came to pass, when the king heard the saying of the man of God, which he cried against the altar in Bethel, that Jeroboam put forth his hand from the altar, saying, Lay hold on him. And his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could not draw it back again to him.
The altar also was torn, and the ashes poured out from the altar, according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of Jehovah.
And the king answered and said to the man of God, Entreat now the favor of Jehovah thy God, and pray for me that my hand may be restored to me again. And the man of God entreated Jehovah, and the king's hand was restored to him again, and became as it was before.
And the king said to the man of God, Come home with me, and refresh thyself, and I will give thee a reward.
And the man of God said to the king, If thou will give me half thy house, I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink water in this place;
for so it was charged me by the word of Jehovah, saying, Thou shall eat no bread, nor drink water, neither return by the way that thou came.
So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came to Bethel.
Now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel. And one of his sons came and told him all the works that the man of God had done that day in Bethel. The words which he had spoken to the king, they also told them to their father.
And their father said to them, What way did he go? Now his sons had seen what way the man of God went, who came from Judah.
And he said to his sons, Saddle the donkey for me. So they saddled him the donkey, and he rode on it.
And he went after the man of God, and found him sitting under an oak. And he said to him, Are thou the man of God who came from Judah? And he said, I am.
Then he said to him, Come home with me, and eat bread.
And he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee. Neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place;
for it was said to me by the word of Jehovah, Thou shall eat no bread nor drink water there, nor turn again to go by the way that thou came.
And he said to him, I also am a prophet as thou are. And an agent spoke to me by the word of Jehovah, saying, Bring him back with thee into thy house that he may eat bread and drink water. But he lied to him.
So he went back with him, and ate bread in his house, and drank water.
And it came to pass, as they sat at the table, that the word of Jehovah came to the prophet who brought him back.
And he cried out to the man of God who came from Judah, saying, Thus says Jehovah, Forasmuch as thou have been disobedient to the mouth of Jehovah, and have not kept the commandment which Jehovah thy God commanded thee,
but came back, and have eaten bread and drunk water in the place of which he said to thee, Eat no bread, and drink no water, thy body shall not come to the sepulcher of thy fathers.
And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had drunk, that he saddled the donkey for him, namely, for the prophet whom he had brought back.
And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and killed him. And his body was cast in the way, and the donkey stood by it. The lion also stood by the body.
And, behold, men passed by, and saw the body cast in the way, and the lion standing by the body. And they came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt.
And when the prophet who brought him back from the way heard of it, he said, It is the man of God who was disobedient to the mouth of Jehovah. Therefore Jehovah has delivered him to the lion, which has torn him, and slain him, according to the word of Jehovah which he spoke to him.
And he spoke to his sons, saying, Saddle the donkey for me. And they saddled it.
And he went and found his body cast in the way, and the donkey and the lion standing by the body. The lion had not eaten the body, nor torn the donkey.
And the prophet took up the body of the man of God, and laid it upon the donkey, and brought it back. And he came to the city of the old prophet, to mourn, and to bury him.
And he laid his body in his own grave. And they mourned over him, saying, Alas, my brother!
And it came to pass, after he had buried him, that he spoke to his sons, saying, When I am dead, then bury me in the sepulcher in which the man of God is buried. Lay my bones beside his bones.
For the saying which he cried by the word of Jehovah against the altar in Bethel, and against all the houses of the high places which are in the cities of Samaria, shall surely come to pass.
After this thing Jeroboam did not return from his evil way, but again made from among all the people priests of the high places. Whoever would, he consecrated him, that there might be priests of the high places.
And this thing became sin to the house of Jeroboam, even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth.

At that time Abijah the son of Jeroboam fell sick.
And Jeroboam said to his wife, Arise, I pray thee, and disguise thyself that thou not be known to be the wife of Jeroboam, and get thee to Shiloh. Behold, there is Ahijah the prophet who spoke concerning me that I should be king over this people.
And take with thee ten loaves, and cakes, and a cruse of honey, and go to him. He will tell thee what shall become of the child.
And Jeroboam's wife did so, and arose, and went to Shiloh, and came to the house of Ahijah. Now Ahijah could not see, for his eyes were set because of his age.
And Jehovah said to Ahijah, Behold, the wife of Jeroboam comes to inquire of thee concerning her son, for he is sick. Thus and thus thou shall say to her, for it will be, when she comes in, that she will feign herself to be another woman.
And it was so, when Ahijah heard the sound of her feet, as she came in at the door, that he said, Come in, thou wife of Jeroboam. Why feign thou thyself to be another? For I am sent to thee with heavy news.
Forasmuch as I exalted thee from among the people, and made thee prince over my people Israel,
and tore the kingdom away from the house of David, and gave it thee, and yet thou have not been as my servant David, who kept my commandments, and who followed me with all his heart to do only that which was right in my eyes,
but have done evil above all who were before thee, and have gone and made thee other gods, and molten images to provoke me to anger, and have cast me behind thy back,
therefore, behold, I will bring evil upon the house of Jeroboam, and will cut off from Jeroboam every man-child, he who is shut up and he who is left at large in Israel, and will utterly sweep away the house of Jeroboam as a man sweeps away dung, till it be all gone.
He who dies of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat, and he who dies in the field shall the birds of the heavens eat, for Jehovah has spoken it.
Arise thou therefore, get thee to thy house. When thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die.
And all Israel shall mourn for him, and bury him, for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found some good thing toward Jehovah, the God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam.
Moreover Jehovah will raise up a king for him over Israel who shall cut off the house of Jeroboam that day. But what? Even now.
For Jehovah will smite Israel as a reed is shaken in the water. And he will root up Israel out of this good land which he gave to their fathers, and will scatter them beyond the River because they have made their Asherim, provoking Jehovah to anger.
And he will give Israel up because of the sins of Jeroboam, which he has sinned, and with which he has made Israel to sin.
And Jeroboam's wife arose, and departed, and came to Tirzah. As she came to the threshold of the house, the child died.
And all Israel buried him, and mourned for him, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by his servant Ahijah the prophet.
And the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, how he warred, and how he reigned, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
And the days which Jeroboam reigned were twenty-two years, and he slept with his fathers. And Nadab his son reigned in his stead.
And Rehoboam the son of Solomon reigned in Judah. Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which Jehovah had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put his name there. And his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess.
And Judah did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and they provoked him to jealousy with their sins which they committed, above all that their fathers had done.
For they also built for them high places, and pillars, and Asherim, on every high hill, and under every green tree.
And there were also sodomites in the land. They did according to all the abominations of the nations which Jehovah drove out before the sons of Israel.
And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem.
And he took away the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king's house. He even took away all. And he took away all the shields of gold which Solomon had made.
And king Rehoboam made in their stead shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the captains of the guard who kept the door of the king's house.
And it was so, that, as often as the king went into the house of Jehovah, the guard bore them, and brought them back into the guard-chamber.
Now the rest of the acts of Rehoboam, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.
And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess. And Abijah his son reigned in his stead.

Now in the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam the son of Nebat, Abijah began to reign over Judah.
He reigned three years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.
And he walked in all the sins of his father, which he had done before him. And his heart was not perfect with Jehovah his God as the heart of David his father.
Nevertheless for David's sake Jehovah his God gave him a lamp in Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem,
because David did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, and did not turn aside from anything that he commanded him all the days of his life, except only in the matter of Uriah the Hittite.
Now there was war between Rehoboam and Jeroboam all the days of his life.
And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.
And Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David. And Asa his son reigned in his stead.
And in the twentieth year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Asa began to reign over Judah.
And he reigned forty-one years in Jerusalem. And his grandmother's name was Maacah the daughter of Abishalom.
And Asa did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah as David his father did.
And he put away the sodomites out of the land, and removed all the idols that his fathers had made.
And also he removed Maacah his grandmother from being queen because she had made an abominable image for an Asherah. And Asa cut down her image, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.
But the high places were not taken away. Nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect with Jehovah all his days.
And he brought into the house of Jehovah the things that his father had dedicated, and the things that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels.
And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.
And Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not allow anyone to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.
Then Asa took all the silver and the gold that were left in the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king's house, and delivered them into the hand of his servants. And king Asa sent them to Ben-hadad, the son of Tabrimmon, the son of Hezion, king of Syria, who dwelt at Damascus, saying,
There is a league between me and thee, between my father and thy father. Behold, I have sent to thee a present of silver and gold. Go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel, that he may depart from me.
And Ben-hadad hearkened to king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel, and smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-beth-maacah, and all Chinneroth, with all the land of Naphtali.
And it came to pass, when Baasha heard of it, that he left off building Ramah, and dwelt in Tirzah.
Then king Asa made a proclamation to all Judah; none was exempted. And they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber of it, with which Baasha had built. And king Asa built with it Geba of Benjamin, and Mizpah.
Now the rest of all the acts of Asa, and all his might, and all that he did, and the cities which he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah? But in the time of his old age he was diseased in his feet.
And Asa slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father. And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead.
And Nadab the son of Jeroboam began to reign over Israel in the second year of Asa king of Judah. And he reigned over Israel two years.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and walked in the way of his father, and in his sin with which he made Israel to sin.
And Baasha the son of Ahijah, of the house of Issachar, conspired against him. And Baasha smote him at Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines, for Nadab and all Israel were laying siege to Gibbethon.
Baasha killed him in the third year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead.
And it came to pass that, as soon as he was king, he smote all the house of Jeroboam. He left to Jeroboam not any who breathed, until he had destroyed him according to the saying of Jehovah, which he spoke by his servant Ahijah the Shilonite,
for the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned, and with which he made Israel to sin, because of his provocation with which he provoked Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger.
Now the rest of the acts of Nadab, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And there was war between Asa and Baasha king of Israel all their days.
In the third year of Asa king of Judah, Baasha the son of Ahijah began to reign over all Israel in Tirzah, and reigned twenty-four years.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and walked in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin with which he made Israel to sin.

And the word of Jehovah came to Jehu the son of Hanani against Baasha, saying,
Forasmuch as I exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee prince over my people Israel, and thou have walked in the way of Jeroboam, and have made my people Israel to sin, to provoke me to anger with their sins,
behold, I will utterly sweep away Baasha and his house, and I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
He of Baasha who dies in the city shall the dogs eat, and he of his who dies in the field shall the birds of the heavens eat.
Now the rest of the acts of Baasha, and what he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Baasha slept with his fathers, and was buried in Tirzah, and Elah his son reigned in his stead.
And moreover the word of Jehovah came against Baasha by the prophet Jehu the son of Hanani, and against his house, both because of all the evil that he did in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger with the work of his hands in being like the house of Jeroboam, and because he smote him.
In the twenty-sixth year of Asa king of Judah, Elah the son of Baasha began to reign over Israel in Tirzah, and reigned two years.
And his servant Zimri, captain of half his chariots, conspired against him. Now he was in Tirzah, drinking himself drunk in the house of Arza, who was over the household in Tirzah.
And Zimri went in and smote him, and killed him in the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah, and reigned in his stead.
And it came to pass, when he began to reign, as soon as he sat on his throne, that he smote all the house of Baasha. He left him not a single man-child, neither of his kinfolks, nor of his friends.
Thus Zimri destroyed all the house of Baasha according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke against Baasha by Jehu the prophet,
for all the sins of Baasha, and the sins of Elah his son, which they sinned, and with which they made Israel to sin, to provoke Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger with their vanities.
Now the rest of the acts of Elah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
In the twenty-seventh year of Asa king of Judah Zimri reigned seven days in Tirzah. Now the people were encamped against Gibbethon, which belonged to the Philistines.
And the people who were encamped heard say, Zimri has conspired, and has also smitten the king. Therefore all Israel made Omri, the captain of the army, king over Israel that day in the camp.
And Omri went up from Gibbethon, and all Israel with him, and they besieged Tirzah.
And it came to pass, when Zimri saw that the city was taken, that he went into the castle of the king's house, and burnt the king's house over him with fire,
and died for his sins which he sinned in doing that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, in walking in the way of Jeroboam, and in his sin which he did to make Israel to sin.
Now the rest of the acts of Zimri, and his treason that he wrought, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
Then the people of Israel were divided into two parts; half of the people followed Tibni the son of Ginath, to make him king, and half followed Omri.
But the people who followed Omri prevailed against the people who followed Tibni the son of Ginath. So Tibni died, and Omri reigned.
In the thirty-first year of Asa king of Judah, Omri began to reign over Israel, and reigned twelve years. He reigned six years in Tirzah.
And he bought the hill Samaria of Shemer for two talents of silver. And he built on the hill, and called the name of the city which he built after the name of Shemer, the owner of the hill, Samaria.
And Omri did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and dealt wickedly above all who were before him.
For he walked in all the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and in his sins with which he made Israel to sin, to provoke Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger with their vanities.
Now the rest of the acts of Omri which he did, and his might that he showed, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
So Omri slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria, and Ahab his son reigned in his stead.
And in the thirty-eighth year of Asa king of Judah, Ahab the son of Omri began to reign over Israel. And Ahab the son of Omri reigned over Israel in Samaria twenty-two years.
And Ahab the son of Omri did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah above all who were before him.
And it came to pass, as if it had been a light thing for him to walk in the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, that he took to wife Jezebel the daughter of Ethbaal king of the Sidonians, and went and served Baal, and worshiped him.
And he reared up an altar for Baal in the house of Baal, which he had built in Samaria.
And Ahab made the Asherah. And Ahab did yet more to provoke Jehovah, the God of Israel, to anger than all the kings of Israel who were before him.
In his days did Hiel the Bethelite build Jericho. He laid the foundation of it with the loss of Abiram his firstborn, and set up the gates of it with the loss of his youngest son Segub, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by Joshua the son of Nun.

And Elijah the Tishbite, who was of the sojourners of Gilead, said to Ahab, As Jehovah, the God of Israel, lives, before whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years, but according to my word.
And the word of Jehovah came to him, saying,
Get thee from here, and turn thee eastward, and hide thyself by the brook Cherith that is before the Jordan.
And it shall be, that thou shall drink of the brook, and I have commanded the ravens to feed thee there.
So he went and did according to the word of Jehovah, for he went and dwelt by the brook Cherith that is before the Jordan.
And the ravens brought him bread and flesh in the morning, and bread and flesh in the evening, and he drank of the brook.
And it came to pass after a while, that the brook dried up because there was no rain in the land.
And the word of Jehovah came to him, saying,
Arise, get thee to Zarephath, which belongs to Sidon, and dwell there. Behold, I have commanded a widow there to sustain thee.
So he arose and went to Zarephath. And when he came to the gate of the city, behold, a widow was there gathering sticks. And he called to her, and said, Fetch me, I pray thee, a little water in a vessel that I may drink.
And as she was going to fetch it, he called to her, and said, Bring me, I pray thee, a morsel of bread in thy hand.
And she said, As Jehovah thy God lives, I do not have a cake, but a handful of meal in the jar, and a little oil in the cruse. And, behold, I am gathering two sticks, that I may go in and dress it for me and my son that we may eat it, and die.
And Elijah said to her, Fear not, go and do as thou have said. But make me of it a little cake first, and bring it forth to me, and afterward make for thee and for thy son.
For thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, The jar of meal shall not be used up, neither shall the cruse of oil fail, until the day that Jehovah sends rain upon the earth.
And she went and did according to the saying of Elijah. And she, and he, and her house, ate many days.
The jar of meal was not used up, neither did the cruse of oil fail, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by Elijah.
And it came to pass after these things, that the son of the woman, the mistress of the house, fell sick, and his sickness was so severe that there was no breath left in him.
And she said to Elijah, What have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? Thou have come to me to bring my sin to remembrance, and to kill my son!
And he said to her, Give me thy son. And he took him out of her bosom, and carried him up into the chamber where he abode, and laid him upon his own bed.
And he cried to Jehovah, and said, O Jehovah my God, have thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn by slaying her son?
And he stretched himself upon the child three times, and cried to Jehovah, and said, O Jehovah my God, I pray thee, let this child's soul come into him again.
And Jehovah hearkened to the voice of Elijah, and the soul of the child came into him again, and he revived.
And Elijah took the child, and brought him down out of the chamber into the house, and delivered him to his mother. And Elijah said, See, thy son lives.
And the woman said to Elijah, Now I know that thou are a man of God, and that the word of Jehovah in thy mouth is truth.

And it came to pass after many days, that the word of Jehovah came to Elijah, in the third year, saying, Go, show thyself to Ahab, and I will send rain upon the earth.
And Elijah went to show himself to Ahab. And the famine was severe in Samaria.
And Ahab called Obadiah, who was over the household. (Now Obadiah feared Jehovah greatly;
for it was so, when Jezebel cut off the prophets of Jehovah, that Obadiah took a hundred prophets, and hid them by fifties in a cave, and fed them with bread and water.)
And Ahab said to Obadiah, Go through the land, to all the fountains of water, and to all the brooks. Perhaps we may find grass and save the horses and mules alive, that we not lose all the beasts.
So they divided the land between them to pass throughout it; Ahab went one way by himself, and Obadiah went another way by himself.
And as Obadiah was in the way, behold, Elijah met him. And he knew him, and fell on his face, and said, Is it thou, my lord Elijah?
And he answered him, It is I. Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.
And he said, How have I sinned that thou would deliver thy servant into the hand of Ahab to kill me?
As Jehovah thy God lives, there is no nation or kingdom where my lord has not sent to seek thee. And when they said, He is not here, he took an oath from the kingdom and nation that they did not find thee.
And now thou say, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here.
And it will come to pass, as soon as I am gone from thee, that the Spirit of Jehovah will carry thee where I know not. And so when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, he will kill me. But I thy servant fear Jehovah from my youth.
Was it not told my lord what I did when Jezebel killed the prophets of Jehovah, how I hid a hundred men of Jehovah's prophets by fifties in a cave, and fed them with bread and water?
And now thou say, Go, tell thy lord, Behold, Elijah is here, and he will kill me.
And Elijah said, As Jehovah of hosts lives, before whom I stand, I will surely show myself to him today.
So Obadiah went to meet Ahab, and told him, and Ahab went to meet Elijah.
And it came to pass, when Ahab saw Elijah, that Ahab said to him, Is it thou, thou troubler of Israel?
And he answered, I have not troubled Israel, but thou, and thy father's house, in that ye have forsaken the commandments of Jehovah, and thou have followed the Baalim.
Now therefore send, and gather to me all Israel to mount Carmel, and the prophets of Baal four hundred and fifty, and the prophets of the Asherah four hundred, who eat at Jezebel's table.
So Ahab sent to all the sons of Israel, and gathered the prophets together to mount Carmel.
And Elijah came near to all the people, and said, How long do ye go limping between the two sides? If Jehovah be God, follow him, but if Baal, then follow him. And the people answered him not a word.
Then Elijah said to the people, I, even I only, am left a prophet of Jehovah, but Baal's prophets are four hundred and fifty men.
Let them therefore give us two bullocks, and let them choose one bullock for themselves, and cut it in pieces, and lay it on the wood, and put no fire under. And I will dress the other bullock, and lay it on the wood, and put no fire under.
And call ye on the name of your god, and I will call on the name of Jehovah. And the God that answers by fire, let him be God. And all the people answered and said, It is well spoken.
And Elijah said to the prophets of Baal, Choose you one bullock for yourselves, and dress it first, for ye are many, and call on the name of your god, but put no fire under.
And they took the bullock which was given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear us. But there was no voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped about the altar which was made.
And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked them, and said, Cry aloud, for he is a god. Either he is meditating, or he is gone aside, or he is on a journey, or perhaps he sleeps and must be awakened.
And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after their manner with knives and lances, till the blood gushed out upon them.
And it was so, when midday was past, that they prophesied until the time of the offering of the evening oblation, but there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.
And Elijah said to all the people, Come near to me. And all the people came near to him. And he repaired the altar of Jehovah that was thrown down.
And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob to whom the word of Jehovah came, saying, Israel shall be thy name.
And with the stones he built an altar in the name of Jehovah. And he made a trench around the altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed.
And he put the wood in order, and cut the bullock in pieces, and laid it on the wood. And he said, Fill four jars with water, and pour it on the burnt offering, and on the wood.
And he said, Do it the second time, and they did it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time, and they did it the third time.
And the water ran round about the altar, and he also filled the trench with water.
And it came to pass at the time of the offering of the evening oblation, that Elijah the prophet came near, and said, O Jehovah, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, let it be known this day that thou are God in Israel, and that I am thy servant, and that I have done all these things at thy word.
Hear me, O Jehovah, hear me, that this people may know that thou, Jehovah, are God, and that thou have turned their heart back again.
Then the fire of Jehovah fell, and consumed the burnt offering, and the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the trench.
And when all the people saw it, they fell on their faces. And they said, Jehovah, he is God, Jehovah, he is God.
and Elijah said to them, Take the prophets of Baal; let not one of them escape. And they took them, and Elijah brought them down to the brook Kishon, and killed them there.
And Elijah said to Ahab, Get thee up, eat and drink, for there is the sound of abundance of rain.
So Ahab went up to eat and to drink. And Elijah went up to the top of Carmel, and he bowed himself down upon the earth, and put his face between his knees.
And he said to his servant, Go up now, look toward the sea. And he went up, and looked, and said, There is nothing. And he said, Go again seven times.
And it came to pass at the seventh time, that he said, Behold, a cloud rises out of the sea, as small as a man's hand. And he said, Go up, say to Ahab, Make ready thy chariot, and get thee down, that the rain not stop thee.
And it came to pass in a little while, that the heavens grew black with clouds and wind, and there was a great rain. And Ahab rode, and went to Jezreel.
And the hand of Jehovah was on Elijah, and he girded up his loins, and ran before Ahab to the entrance of Jezreel.

And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and also how he had slain all the prophets with the sword.
Then Jezebel sent a messenger to Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I do not make thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this time.
And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life. And he came to Beersheba, which belongs to Judah, and left his servant there.
But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came and sat down under a juniper tree. And he requested for himself that he might die, and said, It is enough, now, O Jehovah, take away my life, for I am no better than my fathers.
And he lay down and slept under a juniper tree, and, behold, an agent touched him, and said to him, Arise and eat.
And he looked, and, behold, there was at his head a cake baked on the coals, and a cruse of water. And he ate and drank, and laid him down again.
And the agent of Jehovah came again the second time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat because the journey is too great for thee.
And he arose, and ate and drank, and went in the strength of that food forty days and forty nights to Horeb the mount of God.
And he came to a cave there, and lodged there. And, behold, the word of Jehovah came to him, and he said to him, What are thou doing here, Elijah?
And he said, I have been very jealous for Jehovah, the God of hosts. For the sons of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword. And I, even I only, am left, and they seek my life, to take it away.
And he said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before Jehovah. And, behold, Jehovah passed by, and a great and strong wind tore the mountains, and broke in pieces the rocks before Jehovah, but Jehovah was not in the wind. And after the wind an earthquake, but Jehovah was not in the earthquake.
And after the earthquake a fire, but Jehovah was not in the fire. And after the fire a still small voice.
And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entrance of the cave. And, behold, there came a voice to him, and said, What are thou doing here, Elijah?
And he said, I have been very jealous for Jehovah, the God of hosts. For the sons of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword. And I, even I only, am left, and they seek my life to take it away.
And Jehovah said to him, Go, return on thy way to the wilderness of Damascus. And when thou come, thou shall anoint Hazael to be king over Syria.
And thou shall anoint Jehu the son of Nimshi to be king over Israel. And thou shall anoint Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah to be prophet in thy place.
And it shall come to pass, that he who escapes from the sword of Hazael, Jehu shall kill. And he who escapes from the sword of Jehu, Elisha shall kill.
Yet I have reserved for me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed to Baal, and every mouth which has not kissed him.
So he departed from there, and found Elisha the son of Shaphat who was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth. And Elijah passed over to him, and cast his mantle upon him.
And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah, and said, Let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother, and then I will follow thee. And he said to him, Go back again, for what have I done to thee?
And he returned from following him, and took the yoke of oxen, and killed them, and boiled their flesh with the instruments of the oxen, and gave to the people, and they ate. Then he arose, and went after Elijah, and ministered to him.

And Ben-hadad the king of Syria gathered all his army together. And there were thirty-two kings with him, and horses and chariots. And he went up and besieged Samaria, and fought against it.
And he sent messengers to Ahab king of Israel, into the city, and said to him, Thus says Ben-hadad,
Thy silver and thy gold is mine, thy wives also and thy sons, even the best, are mine.
And the king of Israel answered and said, It is according to thy saying, my lord, O king, I am thine, and all that I have.
And the messengers came again, and said, Thus speaks Ben-hadad, saying, I indeed sent to thee, saying, Thou shall deliver to me thy silver, and thy gold, and thy wives, and thy sons.
But I will send my servants to thee tomorrow about this time, and they shall search thy house, and the houses of thy servants. And it shall be, that whatever is pleasant in thine eyes, they shall put it in their hand, and take it away.
Then the king of Israel called all the elders of the land, and said, Mark, I pray you, and see how this man seeks mischief, for he sent to me for my wives, and for my sons, and for my silver, and for my gold, and I did not deny him.
And all the elders and all the people said to him, Do thou not hearken, nor consent.
Therefore he said to the messengers of Ben-hadad, Tell my lord the king, All that thou sent for to thy servant at the first I will do, but this thing I may not do. And the messengers departed, and brought him word again.
And Ben-hadad sent to him, and said, The gods do so to me, and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for handfuls for all the people that follow me.
And the king of Israel answered and said, Tell him, Let not him who girds on his armor boast himself as he who puts it off.
And it came to pass, when Ben-hadad heard this message as he was drinking, he and the kings, in the pavilions, that he said to his servants, Set yourselves in array. And they set themselves in array against the city.
And, behold, a prophet came near to Ahab king of Israel, and said, Thus says Jehovah, Have thou seen all this great multitude? Behold, I will deliver it into thy hand this day, and thou shall know that I am Jehovah.
And Ahab said, By whom? And he said, Thus says Jehovah, By the young men of the rulers of the provinces. Then he said, Who shall begin the battle? And he answered, Thou.
Then he mustered the young men of the rulers of the provinces, and they were two hundred and thirty-two. And after them he mustered all the people, even all the sons of Israel, being seven thousand.
And they went out at noon. But Ben-hadad was drinking himself drunk in the pavilions, he and the kings, the thirty-two kings who helped him.
And the young men of the rulers of the provinces went out first. And Ben-hadad sent out, and they told him, saying, There are men come out from Samaria.
And he said, Whether they come out for peace, take them alive, or whether they come out for war, take them alive.
So these went out of the city, the young men of the rulers of the provinces, and the army which followed them.
And they killed everyone his man. And the Syrians fled, and Israel pursued them. And Ben-hadad the king of Syria escaped on a horse with horsemen.
And the king of Israel went out, and smote the horses and chariots, and killed the Syrians with a great slaughter.
And the prophet came near to the king of Israel, and said to him, Go, strengthen thyself. And mark, and see what thou do, for at the return of the year the king of Syria will come up against thee.
And the servants of the king of Syria said to him, Their god is a god of the hills, therefore they were stronger than we. But let us fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they.
Take the kings away, every man out of his place, and put captains in their place.
And number thee an army, like the army that thou have lost, horse for horse, and chariot for chariot. And we will fight against them in the plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they. And he hearkened to their voice, and did so.
And it came to pass at the return of the year, that Ben-hadad mustered the Syrians, and went up to Aphek to fight against Israel.
And the sons of Israel were mustered, and were supported, and went against them. And the sons of Israel encamped before them like two little flocks of kids, but the Syrians filled the country.
And a man of God came near and spoke to the king of Israel, and said, Thus says Jehovah, Because the Syrians have said, Jehovah is a god of the hills, but he is not a god of the valleys, therefore I will deliver all this great multitude into thy hand, and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
And they encamped one opposite the other seven days. And so it was, that in the seventh day the battle was joined. And the sons of Israel killed of the Syrians a hundred thousand footmen in one day.
But the rest fled to Aphek, into the city, and the wall fell upon twenty-seven thousand men who were left. And Ben-hadad fled, and came into the city, into an inner chamber.
And his servants said to him, Behold now, we have heard that the kings of the house of Israel are merciful kings. Let us, we pray thee, put sackcloth on our loins, and ropes upon our heads, and go out to the king of Israel. Perhaps he will save thy life.
So they girded sackcloth on their loins, and put ropes on their heads, and came to the king of Israel, and said, Thy servant Ben-hadad says, I pray thee, let me live. And he said, Is he yet alive? He is my brother.
Now the men observed diligently whether anything would come from him. And they quickly caught it, and they said, Thy brother Ben-hadad. Then he said, Go ye, bring him. Then Ben-hadad came forth to him, and he caused him to come up into the chariot.
And Ben-hadad said to him, The cities which my father took from thy father I will restore, and thou shall make streets for thee in Damascus as my father made in Samaria. And I, said Ahab, will let thee go with this covenant. So he made a covenant with him, and let him go.
And a certain man of the sons of the prophets said by the word of Jehovah to his fellow, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man refused to smite him.
Then said he to him, Because thou have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah, behold, as soon as thou are departed from me, a lion shall kill thee. And as soon as he was departed from him, a lion found him, and killed him.
Then he found another man, and said, Smite me, I pray thee. And the man smote him, smiting and wounding him.
So the prophet departed, and waited for the king by the way, and disguised himself with his headband over his eyes.
And as the king passed by, he cried out to the king, and he said, Thy servant went out into the midst of the battle, and, behold, a man turned aside, and brought a man to me, and said, Keep this man. If by any means he is missing, then shall thy life be for his life, or else thou shall pay a talent of silver.
And as thy servant was busy here and there, he was gone. And the king of Israel said to him, So shall thy judgment be, thyself have decided it.
And he hastened, and took the headband away from his eyes, and the king of Israel discerned him that he was of the prophets.
And he said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Because thou have let go out of thy hand the man whom I had devoted to destruction, therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people.
And the king of Israel went to his house heavy and displeased, and came to Samaria.

And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, near by the palace of Ahab king of Samaria.
And Ahab spoke to Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard that I may have it for a garden of herbs because it is near to my house. And I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it, or, if it seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money.
And Naboth said to Ahab, Jehovah forbid it of me that I should give the inheritance of my fathers to thee.
And Ahab came into his house heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite had spoken to him, for he had said, I will not give thee the inheritance of my fathers. And he laid himself down upon his bed, and turned away his face, and would eat no bread.
But Jezebel his wife came to him, and said to him, Why is thy spirit so sad that thou eat no bread?
And he said to her, Because I spoke to Naboth the Jezreelite, and said to him, Give me thy vineyard for money, or else, if it please thee, I will give thee another vineyard for it. And he answered, I will not give thee my vineyard.
And Jezebel his wife said to him, Do thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? Arise, and eat bread, and let thy heart be merry. I will give thee the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite.
So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters to the elders and to the nobles who were in his city, and who dwelt with Naboth.
And she wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.
And set two men, base fellows, before him, and let them bear witness against him, saying, Thou cursed God and the king. And then carry him out, and stone him to death.
And the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who dwelt in his city, did as Jezebel had sent to them, according as it was written in the letters which she had sent to them.
They proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people.
And the two men, the base fellows, came in and sat before him. And the base fellows bore witness against him, even against Naboth, in the presence of the people, saying, Naboth cursed God and the king. Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him to death with stones.
Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is stoned, and is dead.
And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused to give thee for money, for Naboth is not alive, but dead.
And it came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite to take possession of it.
And the word of Jehovah came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
Arise, go down to meet Ahab king of Israel, who dwells in Samaria. Behold, he is in the vineyard of Naboth where he has gone down to take possession of it.
And thou shall speak to him, saying, Thus says Jehovah, Have thou killed and also taken possession? And thou shall speak to him, saying, Thus says Jehovah, In the place where dogs licked the blood of Naboth shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine.
And Ahab said to Elijah, Have thou found me, O my enemy? And he answered, I have found thee because thou have sold thyself to do that which is evil in the sight of Jehovah.
Behold, I will bring evil upon thee, and will utterly sweep thee away and will cut off from Ahab every man-child, and he who is shut up and he who is left at large in Israel.
And I will make thy house like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah for the provocation with which thou have provoked me to anger, and have made Israel to sin.
And Jehovah spoke also of Jezebel, saying, The dogs shall eat Jezebel by the rampart of Jezreel.
He who dies of Ahab in the city the dogs shall eat, and he who dies in the field shall the birds of the heavens eat.
(But there was none like Ahab, who sold himself to do that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, whom Jezebel his wife stirred up.
And he did very abominably in following idols, according to all that the Amorites did whom Jehovah cast out before the sons of Israel.)
And it came to pass, when Ahab heard those words, that he tore his clothes, and put sackcloth upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.
And the word of Jehovah came to Elijah the Tishbite, saying,
See thou how Ahab humbles himself before me? Because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in his days, but in his son's days will I bring the evil upon his house.

And they continued three years without war between Syria and Israel.
And it came to pass in the third year, that Jehoshaphat the king of Judah came down to the king of Israel.
And the king of Israel said to his servants, Know ye that Ramoth-gilead is ours, and we are still, and do not take it out of the hand of the king of Syria?
And he said to Jehoshaphat, Will thou go with me to battle to Ramoth-gilead? And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, I am as thou are, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.
And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, Inquire first, I pray thee, for the word of Jehovah.
Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, about four hundred men, and said to them, Shall I go against Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up, for the Lord will deliver it into the hand of the king.
But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah besides, that we may inquire of him?
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, there is yet one man by whom we may inquire of Jehovah, Micaiah the son of Imlah, but I hate him, for he does not prophesy good concerning me, but evil. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.
Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imlah.
Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah were sitting each on his throne, arrayed in their robes, in an open place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria. And all the prophets were prophesying before them.
And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made for him horns of iron, and said, Thus says Jehovah, With these thou shall push the Syrians until they be consumed.
And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper, for Jehovah will deliver it into the hand of the king.
And the messenger who went to call Micaiah spoke to him, saying, Behold now, the words of the prophets declare good to the king with one mouth. Let thy word, I pray thee, be like the word of one of them, and speak thou good.
And Micaiah said, As Jehovah lives, what Jehovah says to me, that I will speak.
And when he came to the king, the king said to him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall we forbear? And he answered him, Go up and prosper, and Jehovah will deliver it into the hand of the king.
And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou speak to me nothing but the truth in the name of Jehovah?
And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. And Jehovah said, These have no master, let them return every man to his house in peace.
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but evil?
And Micaiah said, Therefore hear thou the word of Jehovah. I saw Jehovah sitting on his throne, and all the host of heaven standing by him on his right hand and on his left.
And Jehovah said, Who shall entice Ahab, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one said on this manner, and another said on that manner.
And there came forth a spirit, and stood before Jehovah, and said, I will entice him.
And Jehovah said to him, With what? And he said, I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shall entice him, and shall also prevail. Go forth, and do so.
Now therefore, behold, Jehovah has put a lying spirit in the mouth of all these thy prophets, and Jehovah has spoken evil concerning thee.
Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah on the cheek, and said, Which way did the Spirit of Jehovah go from me to speak to thee?
And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shall see on that day when thou shall go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.
And the king of Israel said, Take Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son,
and say, Thus says the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction until I come in peace.
And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, Jehovah has not spoken by me. And he said, Hear, ye peoples, all of you.
So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and go into the battle, but put thou on thy robes. And the king of Israel disguised himself, and went into the battle.
Now the king of Syria had commanded the thirty-two captains of his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, except only with the king of Israel.
And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, Surely it is the king of Israel, and they turned aside to fight against him. And Jehoshaphat cried out.
And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him.
And a certain man drew his bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the armor. Therefore he said to the driver of his chariot, Turn thy hand, and carry me out of the army, for I am severely wounded.
And the battle increased that day. And the king was propped up in his chariot against the Syrians. And he died at evening, and the blood ran out of the wound into the bottom of the chariot.
And there went a cry throughout the army about the going down of the sun, saying, Every man to his city, and every man to his country.
So the king died, and was brought to Samaria, and they buried the king in Samaria.
And they washed the chariot by the pool of Samaria, and the dogs licked up his blood (now the harlots washed themselves there), according to the word of Jehovah which he spoke.
Now the rest of the acts of Ahab, and all that he did, and the ivory house which he built, and all the cities that he built, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
So Ahab slept with his fathers, and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.
And Jehoshaphat the son of Asa began to reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab king of Israel.
Jehoshaphat was thirty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
And he walked in all the way of Asa his father. He turned not aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah. However the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
And Jehoshaphat made peace with the king of Israel.
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, and his might that he showed, and how he warred, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And he put away out of the land the remnant of the sodomites, who remained in the days of his father Asa.
And there was no king in Edom; a deputy was king.
Jehoshaphat made ships of Tarshish to go to Ophir for gold, but they did not go, for the ships were broken at Ezion-geber.
Then Ahaziah the son of Ahab said to Jehoshaphat, Let my servants go with thy servants in the ships. But Jehoshaphat would not.
And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.
Ahaziah the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the seventeenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and he reigned two years over Israel.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and walked in the way of his father, and in the way of his mother, and in the way of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, how he made Israel to sin.
And he served Baal, and worshiped him, and provoked to anger Jehovah, the God of Israel, according to all that his father had done.

II Kings

And Moab rebelled against Israel after the death of Ahab.
And Ahaziah fell down through the lattice in his upper chamber that was in Samaria, and was sick. And he sent messengers, and said to them, Go, inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, whether I shall recover of this sickness.
But the agent of Jehovah said to Elijah the Tishbite, Arise, go up to meet the messengers of the king of Samaria, and say to them, Is it because there is no God in Israel that ye go to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron?
Now therefore thus says Jehovah, Thou shall not come down from the bed where thou have gone up, but shall surely die. And Elijah departed.
And the messengers returned to him, and he said to them, Why is it that ye are returned?
And they said to him, There came up a man to meet us, and said to us, Go, turn again to the king that sent you, and say to him, Thus says Jehovah, Is it because there is no God in Israel that thou send to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron? Therefore thou shall not come down from the bed where thou have gone up, but shall surely die.
And he said to them, What manner of man was he who came up to meet you, and told you these words?
And they answered him, He was a hairy man, and girt with a belt of leather about his loins. And he said, It is Elijah the Tishbite.
Then the king sent to him a captain of fifty with his fifty. And he went up to him, and, behold, he was sitting on the top of the hill. And he spoke to him, O man of God, the king has said, Come down.
And Elijah answered and said to the captain of fifty, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And there came down fire from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.
And again he sent to him another captain of fifty and his fifty. And he answered and said to him, O man of God, thus has the king said, Come down quickly.
And Elijah answered and said to them, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from heaven, and consume thee and thy fifty. And the fire of God came down from heaven, and consumed him and his fifty.
And again he sent the captain of a third fifty with his fifty. And the third captain of fifty went up, and came and fell on his knees before Elijah, and besought him, and said to him, O man of God, I pray thee, let my life, and the life of these fifty thy servants, be precious in thy sight.
Behold, there came fire down from heaven, and consumed the two former captains of fifty with their fifties, but now let my life be precious in thy sight.
And the agent of Jehovah said to Elijah, Go down with him; do not be afraid of him. And he arose, and went down with him to the king.
And he said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Inasmuch as thou have sent messengers to inquire of Baal-zebub, the god of Ekron, is it because there is no God in Israel to inquire of his word? Therefore thou shall not come down from the bed where thou have gone up, but shall surely die.
So he died according to the word of Jehovah which Elijah had spoken. And Jehoram began to reign in his stead in the second year of Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, because he had no son.
Now the rest of the acts of Ahaziah which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?

And it came to pass, when Jehovah would take up Elijah by a whirlwind into heaven, that Elijah went with Elisha from Gilgal.
And Elijah said to Elisha, Remain here, I pray thee, for Jehovah has sent me as far as Bethel. And Elisha said, As Jehovah lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee. So they went down to Bethel.
And the sons of the prophets who were at Bethel came forth to Elisha, and said to him, Do thou know that Jehovah will take away thy master from thy head today? And he said, Yes, I know it; hold ye your peace.
And Elijah said to him, Elisha, remain here, I pray thee, for Jehovah has sent me to Jericho. And he said, As Jehovah lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee. So they came to Jericho.
And the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho came near to Elisha, and said to him, Do thou know that Jehovah will take away thy master from thy head today? And he answered, Yes, I know it; hold ye your peace.
And Elijah said to him, Remain here, I pray thee, for Jehovah has sent me to the Jordan. And he said, As Jehovah lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee. And the two went on.
And fifty men of the sons of the prophets went, and stood opposite them afar off. And the two stood by the Jordan.
And Elijah took his mantle, and wrapped it together, and struck the waters, and they were divided here and there, so that the two went over on dry ground.
And it came to pass, when they were gone over, that Elijah said to Elisha, Ask what I shall do for thee before I am taken from thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon me.
And he said, Thou have asked a hard thing. Nevertheless, if thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee, but if not, it shall not be so.
And it came to pass, as they still went on, and talked, that, behold, there appeared a chariot of fire, and horses of fire, which divided them both apart. And Elijah went up by a whirlwind into heaven.
And Elisha saw it, and he cried, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen of it! And he saw him no more. And he took hold of his own clothes, and tore them in two pieces.
He also took up the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and went back, and stood by the bank of the Jordan.
And he took the mantle of Elijah that fell from him, and struck the waters, and said, Where is Jehovah, the God of Elijah? And when he also had smitten the waters, they were divided here and there, and Elisha went over.
And when the sons of the prophets who were at Jericho opposite him saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha. And they came to meet him, and bowed themselves to the ground before him.
And they said to him, Behold now, there are fifty strong men with thy servants. Let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master, lest the Spirit of Jehovah has taken him up, and cast him upon some mountain, or into some valley. And he said, Ye shall not send.
And when they urged him till he was ashamed, he said, Send. Therefore they sent fifty men. And they sought three days, but did not find him.
And they came back to him while he remained at Jericho. And he said to them, Did I not say to you, Do not go?
And the men of the city said to Elisha, Behold, we pray thee, the situation of this city is pleasant, as my lord sees, but the water is bad, and the ground barren.
And he said, Bring me a new cruse, and put salt therein. And they brought it to him.
And he went forth to the spring of the waters, and cast salt therein, and said, Thus says Jehovah, I have healed these waters. There shall not be from there any more death or barren land.
So the waters were healed to this day, according to the word of Elisha which he spoke.
And he went up from there to Bethel. And as he was going up by the way, there came forth young lads out of the city, and mocked him, and said to him, Go up, thou baldhead; go up, thou baldhead.
And he looked behind him and saw them, and cursed them in the name of Jehovah. And there came forth two she-bears out of the wood, and tore forty-two lads of them.
And he went from there to mount Carmel, and from there he returned to Samaria.

Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria in the eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah, and reigned twelve years.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, but not like his father and like his mother, for he put away the pillar of Baal that his father had made.
Nevertheless he clung to the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin; he did not depart therefrom.
Now Mesha king of Moab was a sheep-master. And he rendered to the king of Israel the wool of a hundred thousand lambs, and of a hundred thousand rams.
But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab rebelled against the king of Israel.
And king Jehoram went out of Samaria at that time, and mustered all Israel.
And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying, The king of Moab has rebelled against me. Will thou go with me against Moab to battle? And he said, I will go up. I am as thou are, my people as thy people, my horses as thy horses.
And he said, Which way shall we go up? And he answered, The way of the wilderness of Edom.
So the king of Israel went, and the king of Judah, and the king of Edom. And they made a circuit of seven days' journey, and there was no water for the army, nor for the beasts that followed them.
And the king of Israel said, Alas! For Jehovah has called these three kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab.
But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah, that we may inquire of Jehovah by him? And one of the king of Israel's servants answered and said, Elisha the son of Shaphat is here, who poured water on the hands of Elijah.
And Jehoshaphat said, The word of Jehovah is with him. So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to him.
And Elisha said to the king of Israel, What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of thy mother. And the king of Israel said to him, No, for Jehovah has called these three kings together to deliver them into the hand of Moab.
And Elisha said, As Jehovah of hosts lives, before whom I stand, surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, I would not look toward thee, nor see thee.
But now bring me a minstrel. And it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand of Jehovah came upon him.
And he said, Thus says Jehovah, Make this valley full of trenches.
For thus says Jehovah, Ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see rain, yet that valley shall be filled with water, and ye shall drink, both ye and your cattle and your beasts.
And this is but a light thing in the sight of Jehovah. He will also deliver the Moabites into your hand.
And ye shall smite every fortified city, and every choice city, and shall fell every good tree, and stop all fountains of water, and mar every good piece of land with stones.
And it came to pass in the morning, about the time of offering the oblation, that, behold, there came water by the way of Edom, and the country was filled with water.
Now when all the Moabites heard that the kings came up to fight against them, they gathered themselves together, all that were able to put on armor, and upward, and stood on the border.
And they rose up early in the morning, and the sun shone upon the water, and the Moabites saw the water opposite them as red as blood.
And they said, This is blood. The kings are surely destroyed, and they have smitten each man his fellow. Now therefore, Moab, to the spoil.
And when they came to the camp of Israel, the Israelites rose up and smote the Moabites, so that they fled before them, and they went forward into the land smiting the Moabites.
And they beat down the cities. And on every good piece of land they cast every man his stone, and filled it. And they stopped all the fountains of water, and felled all the good trees, until in Kir-hareseth only they left the stones of it. However the slingers went about it, and smote it.
And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too hard for him, he took with him seven hundred men that drew sword to break through to the king of Edom, but they could not.
Then he took his eldest son who should have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall. And there was great wrath against Israel, and they departed from him, and returned to their own land.

Now a certain woman of the wives of the sons of the prophets cried out to Elisha, saying, Thy servant my husband is dead, and thou know that thy servant feared Jehovah, and the creditor has come to take my two children to him to be bondmen.
And Elisha said to her, What shall I do for thee? Tell me, what have thou in the house? And she said, Thy handmaid has not anything in the house except a pot of oil.
Then he said, Go, borrow for thee vessels abroad from all thy neighbors, even empty vessels; borrow not a few.
And thou shall go in, and shut the door upon thee and upon thy sons, and pour out into all those vessels, and thou shall set aside that which is full.
So she went from him, and shut the door upon her and upon her sons. They brought the vessels to her, and she poured out.
And it came to pass, when the vessels were full, that she said to her son, Bring me yet a vessel. And he said to her, There is no more a vessel. And the oil halted.
Then she came and told the man of God. And he said, Go, sell the oil, and pay thy debt, and live thou and thy sons from the rest.
And it fell on a day that Elisha passed to Shunem where there was a prominent woman. And she constrained him to eat bread. And so it was, that as often as he passed by he turned in there to eat bread.
And she said to her husband, Behold now, I perceive that this is a holy man of God who passes by us continually.
Let us make, I pray thee, a little chamber on the wall. And let us set a bed for him there, and a table, and a seat, and a lampstand. And it shall be, when he comes to us, that he shall turn in there.
And it fell on a day that he came there, and he turned into the chamber and lay there.
And he said to Gehazi his servant, Call this Shunammite. And when he had called her, she stood before him.
And he said to him, Say now to her, Behold, thou have been caring for us with all this care. What is to be done for thee? Would thou be spoken for to the king, or to the captain of the army? And she answered, I dwell among my own people.
And he said, What then is to be done for her? And Gehazi answered, Truly she has no son, and her husband is old.
And he said, Call her. And when he had called her, she stood in the door.
And he said, At this season, when the time comes round, thou shall embrace a son. And she said, No, my lord, thou man of God, do not lie to thy handmaid.
And the woman conceived, and bore a son at that season, when the time came round, as Elisha had said to her.
And when the child was grown, it fell on a day that he went out to his father to the reapers.
And he said to his father, My head, my head. And he said to his servant, Carry him to his mother.
And when he had taken him, and brought him to his mother, he sat on her knees till noon, and then died.
And she went up and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and shut the door upon him, and went out.
And she called to her husband, and said, Send me, I pray thee, one of the servants, and one of the donkeys, that I may run to the man of God, and come again.
And he said, Why will thou go to him today? It is neither new moon nor sabbath. And she said, It shall be well.
Then she saddled a donkey, and said to her servant, Drive, and go forward. Do not restrain my riding unless I bid thee.
So she went, and came to the man of God to mount Carmel. And it came to pass, when the man of God saw her afar off, that he said to Gehazi his servant, Behold, yonder is the Shunammite.
Run now, I pray thee, to meet her, and say to her, Is it well with thee? Is it well with thy husband? Is it well with the child? And she answered, It is well.
And when she came to the man of God to the hill, she caught hold of his feet. And Gehazi came near to thrust her away, but the man of God said, Let her alone, for her soul is vexed within her, and Jehovah has hid it from me, and has not told me.
Then she said, Did I desire a son of my lord? Did I not say, do not deceive me?
Then he said to Gehazi, Gird up thy loins, and take my staff in thy hand, and go thy way. If thou meet any man, do not salute him, and if any salute thee, do not answer him again. And lay my staff upon the face of the child.
And the mother of the child said, As Jehovah lives, and as thy soul lives, I will not leave thee. And he arose, and followed her.
And Gehazi passed on before them, and laid the staff upon the face of the child, but there was neither voice, nor hearing. Therefore he returned to meet him, and told him, saying, The child has not awakened.
And when Elisha came into the house, behold, the child was dead, and laid upon his bed.
He went in therefore, and shut the door upon the two of them, and prayed to Jehovah.
And he went up, and lay upon the child, and put his mouth upon his mouth, and his eyes upon his eyes, and his hands upon his hands. And he stretched himself upon him, and the flesh of the child grew warm.
Then he returned, and walked in the house once to and fro, and went up, and stretched himself upon him. And the child sneezed seven times, and the child opened his eyes.
And he called Gehazi, and said, Call this Shunammite. So he called her. And when she came in to him, he said, Take up thy son.
Then she went in, and fell at his feet, and bowed herself to the ground. And she took up her son, and went out.
And Elisha came again to Gilgal. And there was a dearth in the land, and the sons of the prophets were sitting before him. And he said to his servant, Set on the great pot, and boil pottage for the sons of the prophets.
And one went out into the field to gather herbs, and found a wild vine, and gathered wild gourds from it, his lap full, and came and shred them into the pot of pottage, for they did not know them.
So they poured out for the men to eat. And it came to pass, as they were eating of the pottage, that they cried out, and said, O man of God, there is death in the pot. And they could not eat of it.
But he said, Then bring meal. And he cast it into the pot, and he said, Pour out for the people, that they may eat. And there was no harm in the pot.
And a man came from Baal-shalishah, and brought the man of God bread of the first-fruits, twenty loaves of barley, and fresh ears of grain in his sack. And he said, Give to the people that they may eat.
And his servant said, What, should I set this before a hundred men? But he said, Give to the people that they may eat, for thus says Jehovah, They shall eat, and shall leave of it.
So he set it before them, and they ate, and left of it according to the word of Jehovah.

Now Naaman, captain of the army of the king of Syria, was a great man with his master, and honorable, because by him Jehovah had given victory to Syria. He was also a mighty man of valor, but he was a leper.
And the Syrians had gone out in bands, and had brought away captive out of the land of Israel a little maiden, and she waited on Naaman's wife.
And she said to her mistress, Would that my lord were with the prophet who is in Samaria! Then he would heal him of his leprosy.
And a man went in, and told his lord, saying, Thus and thus said the maiden who is of the land of Israel.
And the king of Syria said, Go now, and I will send a letter to the king of Israel. And he departed, and took with him ten talents of silver, and six thousand pieces of gold, and ten changes of raiment.
And he brought the letter to the king of Israel, saying, And now when this letter has come to thee, behold, I have sent Naaman my servant to thee that thou may heal him of his leprosy.
And it came to pass, when the king of Israel had read the letter, that he tore his clothes, and said, Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this man sends to me to heal a man of his leprosy? But consider, I pray you, and see how he seeks a quarrel against me.
And it was so, when Elisha the man of God heard that the king of Israel had torn his clothes, that he sent to the king, saying, Why have thou torn thy clothes? Let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel.
So Naaman came with his horses and with his chariots, and stood at the door of the house of Elisha.
And Elisha sent a messenger to him, saying, Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shall be clean.
But Naaman was angry, and went away, and said, Behold, I thought he will surely come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of Jehovah his God, and wave his hand over the place, and heal the leper.
Are not Abanah and Pharpar, the rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel? May I not wash in them, and be clean? So he turned and went away in a rage.
And his servants came near, and spoke to him, and said, My father, if the prophet had bid thee do some great thing, would thou not have done it? How much rather then, when he says to thee, Wash, and be clean?
Then went he down, and dipped himself seven times in the Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God. And his flesh came again like the flesh of a little child, and he was clean.
And he returned to the man of God, he and all his company, and came, and stood before him. And he said, Behold, now I know that there is no God in all the earth, but in Israel. Now therefore, I pray thee, take a present from thy servant.
But he said, As Jehovah lives, before whom I stand, I will receive none. And he urged him to take it, but he refused.
And Naaman said, If not, yet, I pray thee, let there be given to thy servant two mules' burden of dirt, for thy servant will henceforth offer neither burnt offering nor sacrifice to other gods, but to Jehovah.
when my master goes into the house of Rimmon to worship there, and he leans on my hand, and I bow myself in the house of Rimmon, when I bow myself in the house of Rimmon, Jehovah pardon thy servant in this thing.
And he said to him, Go in peace. So he departed from him a little way.
But Gehazi the servant of Elisha the man of God, said, Behold, my master has spared this Naaman the Syrian, in not receiving at his hands that which he brought. As Jehovah lives, I will run after him, and take something from him.
So Gehazi followed after Naaman. And when Naaman saw him running after him, he alighted from the chariot to meet him, and said, Is all well?
And he said, All is well. My master has sent me, saying, Behold, even now there come to me from the hill-country of Ephraim two young men of the sons of the prophets. Give them, I pray thee, a talent of silver, and two changes of raiment.
And Naaman said, Be pleased to take two talents. And he urged him, and bound two talents of silver in two bags, with two changes of raiment, and laid them upon two of his servants, and they bore them before him.
And when he came to the hill, he took them from their hand, and bestowed them in the house, and he let the men go, and they departed.
But he went in, and stood before his master. And Elisha said to him, From where did thou come, Gehazi? And he said, Thy servant went nowhere.
And he said to him, Did not my heart go with thee when the man turned from his chariot to meet thee? Is it a time to receive money, and to receive garments, and oliveyards and vineyards, and sheep and oxen, and men-servants and maid-servants?
The leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cling to thee, and to thy seed forever. And he went out from his presence a leper as white as snow.

And the sons of the prophets said to Elisha, Behold now, the place where we dwell before thee is too confined for us.
Let us go, we pray thee, to the Jordan, and every man take a beam from there, and let us make us a place there, where we may dwell. And he answered, Go ye.
And one said, Be pleased, I pray thee, to go with thy servants. And he answered, I will go.
So he went with them. And when they came to the Jordan, they cut down wood.
But as one was felling a beam, the axe-head fell into the water. And he cried, and said, Alas, my master! For it was borrowed.
And the man of God said, Where did it fall? And he showed him the place. And he cut down a stick, and cast it in there, and made the iron to float.
And he said, Take it up to thee. So he put out his hand, and took it.
Now the king of Syria was warring against Israel, and he took counsel with his servants, saying, In such and such a place shall be my camp.
And the man of God sent to the king of Israel, saying, Beware that thou not pass such a place, for the Syrians are coming down there.
And the king of Israel sent to the place which the man of God told him and warned him of. And he saved himself there, not once nor twice.
And the heart of the king of Syria was greatly troubled for this thing, and he called his servants, and said to them, Will ye not show me which of us is for the king of Israel?
And one of his servants said, No, my lord, O king, but Elisha, the prophet who is in Israel tells the king of Israel the words that thou speak in thy bedchamber.
And he said, Go and see where he is that I may send and fetch him. And it was told him, saying, Behold, he is in Dothan.
Therefore he sent there horses, and chariots, and a great army. And they came by night, and encompassed the city about.
And when the servant of the man of God was risen early, and gone forth, behold, an army with horses and chariots was round about the city. And his servant said to him, Alas, my master! What shall we do?
And he answered, Fear not, for those who are with us are more than those who are with them.
And Elisha prayed, and said, Jehovah, I pray thee, open his eyes that he may see. And Jehovah opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw. And, behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about Elisha.
And when they came down to him, Elisha prayed to Jehovah, and said, Smite this people, I pray thee, with blindness. And he smote them with blindness according to the word of Elisha.
And Elisha said to them, This is not the way, neither is this the city. Follow me, and I will bring you to the man whom ye seek. And he led them to Samaria.
And it came to pass, when they came into Samaria, that Elisha said, Jehovah, open the eyes of these men that they may see. And Jehovah opened their eyes, and they saw. And, behold, they were in the midst of Samaria.
And the king of Israel said to Elisha, when he saw them, My father, shall I smite them? Shall I smite them?
And he answered, Thou shall not smite them. Would thou smite those whom thou have taken captive with thy sword and with thy bow? Set bread and water before them that they may eat and drink, and go to their master.
And he prepared great provision for them. And when they had eaten and drunk, he sent them away, and they went to their master. And the bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel.
And it came to pass after this, that Benhadad king of Syria gathered all his army, and went up, and besieged Samaria.
And there was a great famine in Samaria. And, behold, they besieged it until a donkey's head was sold for eighty pieces of silver, and the fourth part of a kab of dove's dung for five pieces of silver.
And as the king of Israel was passing by upon the wall, a woman cried out to him, saying, Help, my lord, O king.
And he said, If Jehovah does not help thee, from where shall I help thee? Out of the threshing-floor, or out of the winepress?
And the king said to her, What troubles thee? And she answered, This woman said to me, Give thy son that we may eat him today, and we will eat my son tomorrow.
So we boiled my son, and ate him. And I said to her on the next day, Give thy son that we may eat him. And she has hid her son.
And it came to pass, when the king heard the words of the woman, that he tore his clothes (now he was passing by upon the wall). And the people looked, and, behold, he had sackcloth inside upon his flesh.
Then he said, God do so to me, and more also, if the head of Elisha the son of Shaphat shall stand on him this day.
But Elisha was sitting in his house, and the elders were sitting with him. And the king sent a man from before him, but before the messenger came to him, he said to the elders, Do ye see how this son of a murderer has sent to take away my head? Look, when the messenger comes, shut the door, and hold the door fast against him. Is not the sound of his master's feet behind him?
And while he was yet talking with them, behold, the messenger came down to him, and he said, Behold, this evil is of Jehovah. Why should I wait for Jehovah any longer?

And Elisha said, Hear ye the word of Jehovah. Thus says Jehovah, Tomorrow about this time a measure of fine flour shall be sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, in the gate of Samaria.
Then the captain on whose hand the king leaned answered the man of God, and said, Behold, if Jehovah should make windows in heaven, might this thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall not eat of it.
Now there were four leprous men at the entrance of the gate, and they said one to another, Why do we sit here until we die?
If we say, We will enter into the city, then the famine is in the city, and we shall die there. And if we sit still here, we die also. Now therefore come, and let us fall to the army of the Syrians. If they save us alive, we shall live, and if they kill us, we shall but die.
And they rose up in the twilight, to go to the camp of the Syrians. And when they came to the outermost part of the camp of the Syrians, behold, there was no man there.
For the Lord had made the army of the Syrians to hear a noise of chariots, and a noise of horses, even the noise of a great army. And they said one to another, Lo, the king of Israel has hired against us the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of the Egyptians, to come upon us.
Therefore they arose and fled in the twilight, and left their tents, and their horses, and their donkeys, even the camp as it was, and fled for their life.
And when these lepers came to the outermost part of the camp, they went into one tent, and ate and drank, and carried from there silver, and gold, and raiment, and went and hid it. And they came back, and entered into another tent, and carried from there also, and went and hid it.
Then they said one to another, We are not doing right. This day is a day of good news, and we keep silent. If we delay till the morning light, punishment will overtake us. Now therefore come, let us go and tell the king's household.
So they came and called to the porter of the city. And they told them, saying, We came to the camp of the Syrians, and, behold, there was no man there, neither voice of man, but the horses tied, and the donkeys tied, and the tents as they were.
And he called the porters, and they told it to the king's household within.
And the king arose in the night, and said to his servants, I will now show you what the Syrians have done to us. They know that we are hungry. Therefore they have gone out of the camp to hide themselves in the field, saying, When they come out of the city we shall take them alive, and get into the city.
And one of his servants answered and said, Let, I pray thee, some men take five of the horses that remain, which are left in the city (behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are left in it; behold, they are as all the multitude of Israel that are consumed), and let us send and see.
Therefore they took two chariots with horses. And the king sent after the army of the Syrians, saying, Go and see.
And they went after them to the Jordan. And, lo, all the way was full of garments and vessels, which the Syrians had cast away in their haste. And the messengers returned, and told the king.
And the people went out, and plundered the camp of the Syrians. So a measure of fine flour was sold for a shekel, and two measures of barley for a shekel, according to the word of Jehovah.
And the king appointed the captain on whose hand he leaned to have the charge of the gate. And the people trampled upon him in the gate, and he died as the man of God had said, who spoke when the king came down to him.
And it came to pass, as the man of God had spoken to the king, saying, Two measures of barley for a shekel, and a measure of fine flour for a shekel, shall be tomorrow about this time in the gate of Samaria.
And that captain answered the man of God, and said, Now, behold, if Jehovah should make windows in heaven, might such a thing be? And he said, Behold, thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall not eat of it.
It came to pass even so to him, for the people trampled upon him in the gate, and he died.

Now Elisha had spoken to the woman, whose son he had restored to life, saying, Arise, and go thou and thy household, and sojourn wherever thou can sojourn, for Jehovah has called for a famine, and it shall also come upon the land seven years.
And the woman arose, and did according to the word of the man of God. And she went with her household, and sojourned in the land of the Philistines seven years.
And it came to pass at the end of seven years, that the woman returned out of the land of the Philistines, and she went forth to cry to the king for her house and for her land.
Now the king was talking with Gehazi the servant of the man of God, saying, Tell me, I pray thee, all the great things that Elisha has done.
And it came to pass, as he was telling the king how he had restored to life him who was dead, that, behold, the woman, whose son he had restored to life, cried to the king for her house and for her land. And Gehazi said, My lord, O king, this is the woman, and this is her son whom Elisha restored to life.
And when the king asked the woman, she told him. So the king appointed to her a certain officer, saying, Restore all that was hers, and all the fruits of the field since the day that she left the land, even until now.
And Elisha came to Damascus, and Benhadad the king of Syria was sick. And it was told him, saying, The man of God has come here.
And the king said to Hazael, Take a present in thy hand, and go, meet the man of God, and inquire of Jehovah by him, saying, Shall I recover of this sickness?
So Hazael went to meet him, and took a present with him, even of every good thing of Damascus, forty camels' burden, and came and stood before him, and said, Thy son Benhadad king of Syria has sent me to thee, saying, Shall I recover of this sickness?
And Elisha said to him, Go, say to him, Thou shall surely recover. However Jehovah has shown me that he shall surely die.
And he settled his countenance steadfastly upon him, until he was ashamed. And the man of God wept.
their strongholds thou will set on fire, and their young men thou will kill with the sword, and will dash in pieces their little ones, and rip up their women with child.
And Hazael said, But what is thy servant, who is but a dog, that he should do this great thing? And Elisha answered, Jehovah has shown me that thou shall be king over Syria.
Then he departed from Elisha, and came to his master, who said to him, What did Elisha say to thee? And he answered, He told me that thou would surely recover.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that he took the coverlet, and dipped it in water, and spread it on his face, so that he died. And Hazael reigned in his stead.
And in the fifth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Jehoshaphat being then king of Judah, Jehoram the son of Jehoshaphat king of Judah began to reign.
He was thirty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab, for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
However Jehovah would not destroy Judah, for David his servant's sake, as he promised him to give to him a lamp for his sons always.
In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves.
Then Joram passed over to Zair, and all his chariots with him. And he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites that encompassed him about, and the captains of the chariots. And the people fled to their tents.
So Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time.
And the rest of the acts of Joram, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Joram slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David, and Ahaziah his son reigned in his stead.
In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel, Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah began to reign.
Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri king of Israel.
And he walked in the way of the house of Ahab, and did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, as did the house of Ahab, for he was the son-in-law of the house of Ahab.
And he went with Joram the son of Ahab to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth-gilead, and the Syrians wounded Joram.
And king Joram returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Syria. And Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Joram the son of Ahab in Jezreel, because he was sick.

And Elisha the prophet called one of the sons of the prophets, and said to him, Gird up thy loins, and take this vial of oil in thy hand, and go to Ramoth-gilead.
And when thou come there, look out there for Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi, and go in, and make him arise up from among his brothers, and carry him to an inner chamber.
Then take the vial of oil, and pour it on his head, and say, Thus says Jehovah, I have anointed thee king over Israel. Then open the door, and flee, and delay not.
So the young man, even the young man the prophet, went to Ramoth-gilead.
And when he came, behold, the captains of the army were sitting. And he said, I have an errand to thee, O captain. And Jehu said, To which of us all? And he said, To thee, O captain.
And he arose, and went into the house. And he poured the oil on his head, and said to him, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, I have anointed thee king over the people of Jehovah, even over Israel.
And thou shall smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may avenge the blood of my servants the prophets, and the blood of all the servants of Jehovah, at the hand of Jezebel.
For the whole house of Ahab shall perish. And I will cut off from Ahab every man-child, and him who is shut up and him who is left at large in Israel.
And I will make the house of Ahab like the house of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, and like the house of Baasha the son of Ahijah.
And the dogs shall eat Jezebel in the portion of Jezreel, and there shall be none to bury her. And he opened the door, and fled.
Then Jehu came forth to the servants of his lord, and one said to him, Is all well? Why did this mad fellow come to thee? And he said to them, Ye know the man and what his talk was.
And they said, It is not true; tell us now. And he said, Thus and thus he spoke to me, saying, Thus says Jehovah, I have anointed thee king over Israel.
Then they hastened, and every man took his garment, and put it under him on the top of the stairs, and blew the trumpet, saying, Jehu is king.
So Jehu the son of Jehoshaphat the son of Nimshi conspired against Joram. (Now Joram was keeping Ramoth-gilead, he and all Israel, because of Hazael king of Syria.
But king Joram was returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which the Syrians had given him when he fought with Hazael king of Syria.) And Jehu said, If this be your mind, then let none escape and go forth out of the city to go to tell it in Jezreel.
So Jehu rode in a chariot, and went to Jezreel, for Joram lay there. And Ahaziah king of Judah came down to see Joram.
Now the watchman was standing on the tower in Jezreel, and he spied the company of Jehu as he came, and said, I see a company. And Joram said, Take a horseman, and send to meet them, and let him say, Is it peace?
So one went on horseback to meet him, and said, Thus says the king, Is it peace? And Jehu said, What have thou to do with peace? Turn thee behind me. And the watchman told, saying, The messenger came to them, but he does not come back.
Then he sent out a second on horseback who came to them, and said, Thus says the king, Is it peace? And Jehu answered, What have thou to do with peace? Turn thee behind me.
And the watchman told, saying, He came to them, and does not come back. And the driving is like the driving of Jehu the son of Nimshi, for he drives furiously.
And Joram said, Make ready. And they made his chariot ready. And Joram king of Israel and Ahaziah king of Judah went out, each in his chariot, and they went out to meet Jehu, and found him in the portion of Naboth the Jezreelite.
And it came to pass, when Joram saw Jehu, that he said, Is it peace, Jehu? And he answered, What peace, so long as the whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel and her witchcrafts are so many?
And Joram turned his hands, and fled, and said to Ahaziah, There is treachery, O Ahaziah.
And Jehu drew his bow with his full strength, and smote Joram between his arms. And the arrow went out at his heart, and he sank down in his chariot.
Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the blood of his sons, says Jehovah, and I will requite thee in this plot, says Jehovah. Now therefore take and cast him into the plot of ground, according to the word of Jehovah.
But when Ahaziah the king of Judah saw this, he fled by the way of the garden-house. And Jehu followed after him, and said, Smite him also in the chariot. And they smote him at the ascent of Gur, which is by Ibleam. And he fled to Megiddo, and died there.
And his servants carried him in a chariot to Jerusalem, and buried him in his sepulcher with his fathers in the city of David.
(And it was in the eleventh year of Joram the son of Ahab Ahaziah began to reign over Judah.)
And when Jehu came to Jezreel, Jezebel heard of it. And she painted her eyes, and attired her head, and looked out at the window.
And as Jehu entered in at the gate, she said, Is it peace, thou Zimri, thy master's murderer?
And he lifted up his face to the window, and said, Who is on my side? Who? And two or three eunuchs looked out to him.
And he said, Throw her down. So they threw her down. And some of her blood was sprinkled on the wall, and on the horses. And he trampled her under foot.
And when he came in, he ate and drank, and he said, Now see to this cursed woman, and bury her, for she is a king's daughter.
And they went to bury her, but they found no more of her than the skull, and the feet, and the palms of her hands.
Therefore they came back, and told him. And he said, This is the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by his servant Elijah the Tishbite, saying, In the portion of Jezreel shall the dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel,
and the body of Jezebel shall be as dung upon the face of the field in the portion of Jezreel, so that they shall not say, This is Jezebel.

Now Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria. And Jehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria, to the rulers of Jezreel, even the elders, and to those who brought up the sons of Ahab, saying,
And now as soon as this letter comes to you, seeing your master's sons are with you, and there are with you chariots and horses, also a fortified city, and armor,
look ye out for the best and fittest of your master's sons, and set him on his father's throne, and fight for your master's house.
But they were exceedingly afraid, and said, Behold, the two kings did not stand before him. How then shall we stand?
And he who was over the household, and he who was over the city, the elders also, and those who brought up the sons, sent to Jehu, saying, We are thy servants, and will do all that thou shall bid us. We will not make any man king. Do thou that which is good in thine eyes.
Then he wrote a letter the second time to them, saying, If ye be on my side, and if ye will hearken to my voice, take ye the heads of the men your master's sons, and come to me to Jezreel by tomorrow this time. Now the king's sons, being seventy persons, were with the great men of the city who reared them.
And it came to pass, when the letter came to them, that they took the king's sons, and killed them, even seventy persons, and put their heads in baskets, and sent them to him to Jezreel.
And a messenger came, and told him, saying, They have brought the heads of the king's sons. And he said, Lay ye them in two heaps at the entrance of the gate until the morning.
And it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood, and said to all the people, Ye are righteous. Behold, I conspired against my master, and killed him. But who smote all these?
Know now that there shall fall to the earth nothing of the word of Jehovah, which Jehovah spoke concerning the house of Ahab, for Jehovah has done that which he spoke by his servant Elijah.
So Jehu smote all who remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel, and all his great men, and his familiar friends, and his priests, until he left to him none remaining.
And he arose and departed, and went to Samaria. And as he was at the shearing-house of the shepherds in the way,
Jehu met with the brothers of Ahaziah king of Judah, and said, Who are ye? And they answered, We are the brothers of Ahaziah, and we go down to salute the sons of the king and the sons of the queen.
And he said, Take them alive. And they took them alive, and killed them at the pit of the shearing-house, even forty-two men; neither did he leave any of them.
And when he was departed from there, he came upon on Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him. And he saluted him, and said to him, Is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? And Jehonadab answered, It is. If it be, give me thy hand. And he gave him his hand, and he took him up to him into the chariot.
And he said, Come with me, and see my zeal for Jehovah. So they made him ride in his chariot.
And when he came to Samaria, he smote all who remained to Ahab in Samaria, till he had destroyed him, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke to Elijah.
And Jehu gathered all the people together, and said to them, Ahab served Baal a little, but Jehu will serve him much.
Now therefore call to me all the prophets of Baal, all his worshippers, and all his priests. Let none be lacking, for I have a great sacrifice to do to Baal. Whoever shall be lacking, he shall not live. But Jehu did it in subtlety, to the intent that he might destroy the worshippers of Baal.
And Jehu said, Sanctify a solemn assembly for Baal. And they proclaimed it.
And Jehu sent through all Israel. And all the worshippers of Baal came, so that there was not a man left who did not come. And they came into the house of Baal, and the house of Baal was filled from one end to another.
And he said to him who was over the vestry, Bring forth vestments for all the worshippers of Baal. And he brought forth for them vestments.
And Jehu went, and Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the house of Baal. And he said to the worshippers of Baal, Search, and look that there be here with you none of the servants of Jehovah, but the worshippers of Baal only.
And they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings. Now Jehu had appointed for him eighty men outside, and said, If any of the men whom I bring into your hands escape, he who lets him go, his life shall be for the life of him.
And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt offering, that Jehu said to the guard and to the captains, Go in, and kill them; let none come forth. And they smote them with the edge of the sword. And the guard and the captains cast them out, and went to the city of the house of Baal.
And they brought forth the pillars that were in the house of Baal, and burned them.
And they broke down the pillar of Baal, and broke down the house of Baal, and made it an out-house to this day.
Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel.
However from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin, Jehu did not depart from after them, namely, the golden calves that were in Bethel, and that were in Dan.
And Jehovah said to Jehu, Because thou have done well in executing that which is right in my eyes, and have done to the house of Ahab according to all that was in my heart, thy sons of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.
But Jehu did not take heed to walk in the law of Jehovah, the God of Israel, with all his heart. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam, with which he made Israel to sin.
In those days Jehovah began to cut off from Israel. And Hazael smote them in all the borders of Israel,
from the Jordan eastward, all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the Manassites, from Aroer, which is by the valley of the Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan.
Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Jehu slept with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria. And Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead.
And the time that Jehu reigned over Israel in Samaria was twenty-eight years.

Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal seed.
But Jehosheba, the daughter of king Joram, sister of Ahaziah, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him away from among the king's sons who were slain, even him and his nurse, and put them in the bedchamber. And they hid him from Athaliah, so that he was not slain.
And he was with her hidden in the house of Jehovah six years. And Athaliah reigned over the land.
And in the seventh year Jehoiada sent and fetched the captains over hundreds of the Carites and of the guard, and brought them to him into the house of Jehovah. And he made a covenant with them, and took an oath of them in the house of Jehovah, and showed them the king's son.
a third part of you, who come in on the sabbath, shall be keepers of the watch of the king's house;
and a third part shall be at the gate Sur; and a third part at the gate behind the guard. So shall ye keep the watch of the house, and be a barrier.
And the two companies of you, even all who go forth on the sabbath, shall keep the watch of the house of Jehovah around the king.
And ye shall encompass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand. And he who comes within the ranks, let him be slain. And be ye with the king when he goes out, and when he comes in.
And the captains over hundreds did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded. And every man took his men, those who were to come in on the sabbath, with those who were to go out on the sabbath, and came to Jehoiada the priest.
And the priest delivered to the captains over hundreds the spears and shields that had been king David's, which were in the house of Jehovah.
And the guard stood, every man with his weapons in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, along by the altar and the house, by the king round about.
Then he brought out the king's son, and put the crown upon him, and gave him the testimony. And they made him king, and anointed him. And they clapped their hands, and said, Live, O king.
And when Athaliah heard the noise of the guard and of the people, she came to the people into the house of Jehovah.
And she looked, and, behold, the king stood by the pillar, as the manner was, and the captains and the trumpets by the king. And all the people of the land rejoiced, and blew trumpets. Then Athaliah tore her clothes, and cried, Treason! treason!
And Jehoiada the priest commanded the captains of hundreds who were set over the army, and said to them, Have her forth between the ranks, and kill with the sword the man who follows her. For the priest said, Let her not be slain in the house of Jehovah.
So they made way for her. And she went by the way of the horses' entry to the king's house, and there was she slain.
And Jehoiada made a covenant between Jehovah and the king and the people, that they should be Jehovah's people; between the king also and the people.
And all the people of the land went to the house of Baal, and broke it down. They broke in pieces his altars and his images thoroughly, and killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars. And the priest appointed officers over the house of Jehovah.
And he took the captains over hundreds, and the Carites, and the guard, and all the people of the land, and they brought down the king from the house of Jehovah, and came by the way of the gate of the guard to the king's house. And he sat on the throne of the kings.
So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet. And they had slain Athaliah with the sword at the king's house.
Joash was seven years old when he began to reign.

Joash began to reign in the seventh year of Jehu. And he reigned forty years in Jerusalem, and his mother's name was Zibiah of Beersheba.
And Joash did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah all his days in which Jehoiada the priest instructed him.
However the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
And Joash said to the priests, All the money of the hallowed things that is brought into the house of Jehovah, in current money, the money of the persons for whom each man is rated, and all the money that it comes into any man's heart to bring into the house of Jehovah,
let the priests take it to them, every man from his acquaintance, and they shall repair the broken parts of the house wherever any breach shall be found.
But it was so, that in the twenty-third year of king Joash the priests had not repaired the broken parts of the house.
Then king Joash called for Jehoiada the priest, and for the other priests, and said to them, Why do ye not repair the broken parts of the house? Now therefore take no more money from your acquaintance, but deliver it for the broken parts of the house.
And the priests consented that they should take no more money from the people, neither repair the broken parts of the house.
But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid of it, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as a man comes into the house of Jehovah. And the priests who kept the threshold put in it all the money that was brought into the house of Jehovah.
And it was so, when they saw that there was much money in the chest, that the king's scribe and the high priest came up, and they put up in bags and counted the money that was found in the house of Jehovah.
And they gave the money that was weighed out into the hands of those who did the work, who had the oversight of the house of Jehovah. And they paid it out to the carpenters and the builders who worked upon the house of Jehovah,
and to the masons and the hewers of stone, and for buying timber and hewn stone to repair the broken parts of the house of Jehovah, and for all that was laid out for the house to repair it.
But there were not made for the house of Jehovah cups of silver, snuffers, basins, trumpets, any vessels of gold, or vessels of silver, of the money that was brought into the house of Jehovah,
for they gave that to those who did the work, and with it repaired the house of Jehovah.
Moreover they did not reckon with the men into whose hand they delivered the money to give to those who did the work, for they dealt faithfully.
The money for the trespass offerings, and the money for the sin offerings, was not brought into the house of Jehovah; it was the priests'.
Then Hazael king of Syria went up, and fought against Gath, and took it. And Hazael set his face to go up to Jerusalem.
And Joash king of Judah took all the hallowed things that Jehoshaphat and Jehoram and Ahaziah, his fathers, kings of Judah, had dedicated, and his own hallowed things, and all the gold that was found in the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and of the king's house, and sent it to Hazael king of Syria. And he went away from Jerusalem.
Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And his servants arose, and made a conspiracy, and smote Joash at the house of Millo, on the way that goes down to Silla.
For Jozacar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, his servants, smote him, and he died. And they buried him with his fathers in the city of David. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.

In the twenty-third year of Joash the son of Ahaziah, king of Judah, Jehoahaz the son of Jehu began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned seventeen years.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, and followed the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin. He did not depart from it.
And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Israel, and he delivered them into the hand of Hazael king of Syria, and into the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael, continually.
And Jehoahaz besought Jehovah, and Jehovah hearkened to him, for he saw the oppression of Israel, how that the king of Syria oppressed them.
(And Jehovah gave Israel a savior, so that they went out from under the hand of the Syrians, and the sons of Israel dwelt in their tents as beforetime.
Nevertheless they did not depart from the sins of the house of Jeroboam, with which he made Israel to sin, but walked therein. And the Asherah also remained in Samaria.)
For he did not leave to Jehoahaz of the people except fifty horsemen, and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen, for the king of Syria destroyed them, and made them like the dust in threshing.
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoahaz, and all that he did, and his might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Jehoahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in Samaria. And Joash his son reigned in his stead.
In the thirty-seventh year of Joash king of Judah, Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned sixteen years.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin, but he walked therein.
Now the rest of the acts of Joash, and all that he did, and his might with which he fought against Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Joash slept with his fathers, and Jeroboam sat upon his throne. And Joash was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel.
Now Elisha was fallen sick of his sickness of which he died. And Joash the king of Israel came down to him, and wept over him, and said, My father, my father, the chariots of Israel and the horsemen of it!
And Elisha said to him, Take bow and arrows. And he took to him bow and arrows.
And he said to the king of Israel, Put thy hand upon the bow. And he put his hand upon it. And Elisha laid his hands upon the king's hands.
And he said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. Then Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot. And he said, Jehovah's arrow of victory, even the arrow of victory over Syria, for thou shall smite the Syrians in Aphek till thou have consumed them.
And he said, Take the arrows. And he took them. And he said to the king of Israel, Smite upon the ground. And he smote thrice, and stopped.
And the man of God was angry with him, and said, Thou should have smitten five or six times. Then thou would have smitten Syria till thou had consumed it, whereas now thou shall smite Syria but thrice.
And Elisha died, and they buried him. Now the bands of the Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year.
And it came to pass, as they were burying a man, that, behold, they spied a band, and they cast the man into the sepulcher of Elisha. And as soon as the man touched the bones of Elisha, he revived, and stood up on his feet.
And Hazael king of Syria oppressed Israel all the days of Jehoahaz.
But Jehovah was gracious to them, and had compassion on them, and had respect to them, because of his covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither did he cast them from his presence as yet.
And Hazael king of Syria died, and Benhadad his son reigned in his stead.
And Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz again took out of the hand of Benhadad the son of Hazael the cities, which he had taken out of the hand of Jehoahaz his father by war. Three times Joash smote him, and recovered the cities of Israel.

In the second year of Joash son of Joahaz king of Israel, Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah began to reign.
He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaddin of Jerusalem.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, yet not like David his father. He did according to all that Joash his father had done.
However the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was established in his hand, that he killed his servants who had slain the king his father,
but he did not put to death the sons of the murderers, according to that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, as Jehovah commanded, saying, The fathers shall not be put to death for the sons, nor the sons be put to death for the fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin.
He killed ten thousand of Edom in the Valley of Salt, and took Sela by war, and called the name of it Joktheel, to this day.
Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash, the son of Jehoahaz son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look each other in the face.
And Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife. And a wild beast that was in Lebanon passed by, and trampled the thistle.
Thou have indeed smitten Edom, and thy heart has lifted thee up. Glory by it, and abide at home, for why should thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou should fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?
But Amaziah would not hear. So Jehoash king of Israel went up. And he and Amaziah king of Judah looked each other in the face at Beth-shemesh, which belongs to Judah.
And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every man to his tent.
And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Beth-shemesh, and came to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.
And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the king's house, the hostages also, and returned to Samaria.
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might, and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Jehoash slept with his fathers, and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel. And Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead.
And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived fifteen years after the death of Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel.
Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem. And he fled to Lachish. But they sent after him to Lachish, and killed him there.
And they brought him upon horses, and he was buried at Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David.
And all the people of Judah took Azariah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the place of his father Amaziah.
He built Elath, and restored it to Judah, after the king slept with his fathers.
In the fifteenth year of Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah, Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria, and reigned forty-one years.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
He restored the border of Israel from the entrance of Hamath to the sea of the Arabah, according to the word of Jehovah, the God of Israel, which he spoke by his servant Jonah the son of Amittai, the prophet, who was of Gath-hepher.
For Jehovah saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter, for there was none shut up nor left at large, neither was there any helper for Israel.
And Jehovah did not say that he would blot out the name of Israel from under heaven, but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash.
Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his might, how he warred, and how he recovered Damascus, and Hamath, which had belonged to Judah, for Israel, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel, and Zechariah his son reigned in his stead.

In the twenty-seventh year of Jeroboam king of Israel, Azariah son of Amaziah king of Judah began to reign.
He was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jecoliah of Jerusalem.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his father Amaziah had done.
However the high places were not taken away; the people still sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places.
And Jehovah smote the king, so that he was a leper to the day of his death, and dwelt in a separate house. And Jotham the king's son was over the household, judging the people of the land.
Now the rest of the acts of Azariah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Azariah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the city of David. And Jotham his son reigned in his stead.
In the thirty-eighth year of Azariah king of Judah, Zechariah the son of Jeroboam reigned over Israel in Samaria six months.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, as his fathers had done. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
And Shallum the son of Jabesh conspired against him, and smote him before the people, and killed him, and reigned in his stead.
Now the rest of the acts of Zechariah, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
This was the word of Jehovah which he spoke to Jehu, saying, Thy sons to the fourth generation shall sit upon the throne of Israel. And so it came to pass.
Shallum the son of Jabesh began to reign in the thirty-ninth year of Uzziah king of Judah, and he reigned the space of a month in Samaria.
And Menahem the son of Gadi went up from Tirzah, and came to Samaria, and smote Shallum the son of Jabesh in Samaria, and killed him, and reigned in his stead.
Now the rest of the acts of Shallum, and his conspiracy which he made, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
Then Menahem smote Tiphsah, and all that were therein, and the borders of it, from Tirzah, because they did not open to him, therefore he smote it. And all the women in it who were with child he ripped up.
In the thirty-ninth year of Azariah king of Judah, Menahem the son of Gadi began to reign over Israel, and reigned ten years in Samaria.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart all his days from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
Pul the king of Assyria came against the land. And Menahem gave Pul a thousand talents of silver that his hand might be with him to confirm the kingdom in his hand.
And Menahem exacted the money from Israel, even of all the mighty men of wealth, of each man fifty shekels of silver, to give to the king of Assyria. So the king of Assyria turned back, and did not stay there in the land.
Now the rest of the acts of Menahem, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel?
And Menahem slept with his fathers, and Pekahiah his son reigned in his stead.
In the fiftieth year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekahiah the son of Menahem began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned two years.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
And Pekah the son of Remaliah, his captain, conspired against him, and smote him in Samaria, in the castle of the king's house, with Argob and Arieh. And fifty men of the Gileadites with him were there. And he killed him, and reigned in his stead.
Now the rest of the acts of Pekahiah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
In the fifty-second year of Azariah king of Judah, Pekah the son of Remaliah began to reign over Israel in Samaria, and reigned twenty years.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah. He did not depart from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, with which he made Israel to sin.
In the days of Pekah king of Israel, Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria came, and took Ijon, and Abel-beth-maacah, and Janoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galilee, all the land of Naphtali. And he carried them captive to Assyria.
And Hoshea the son of Elah made a conspiracy against Pekah the son of Remaliah, and smote him, and killed him, and reigned in his stead in the twentieth year of Jotham the son of Uzziah.
Now the rest of the acts of Pekah, and all that he did, behold, they are written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel.
In the second year of Pekah the son of Remaliah king of Israel, Jotham the son of Uzziah king of Judah began to reign.
He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jerusha the daughter of Zadok.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah. He did according to all that his father Uzziah had done.
However the high places were not taken away. The people still sacrificed and burned incense in the high places. He built the upper gate of the house of Jehovah.
Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
In those days Jehovah began to send against Judah Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah.
And Jotham slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David his father. And Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.

In the seventeenth year of Pekah the son of Remaliah, Ahaz the son of Jotham king of Judah began to reign.
Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And he did not do that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah his God, like David his father.
But he walked in the way of the kings of Israel. Yes, and made his son to pass through the fire, according to the abominations of the nations whom Jehovah cast out from before the sons of Israel.
And he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.
Then Rezin king of Syria and Pekah son of Remaliah king of Israel came up to Jerusalem to war, and they besieged Ahaz, but could not overcome him.
At that time Rezin king of Syria recovered Elath to Syria, and drove the Jews from Elath. And the Syrians came to Elath, and dwelt there to this day.
So Ahaz sent messengers to Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, saying, I am thy servant and thy son. Come up, and save me out of the hand of the king of Syria, and out of the hand of the king of Israel, who rise up against me.
And Ahaz took the silver and gold that was found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the king's house, and sent it for a present to the king of Assyria.
And the king of Assyria hearkened to him. And the king of Assyria went up against Damascus, and took it, and carried the people of it captive to Kir, and killed Rezin.
And king Ahaz went to Damascus to meet Tiglath-pileser king of Assyria, and saw the altar that was at Damascus. And king Ahaz sent to Urijah the priest the form of the altar, and the pattern of it, according to all the workmanship of it.
And Urijah the priest built an altar. According to all that king Ahaz had sent from Damascus, so Urijah the priest made it until the coming of king Ahaz from Damascus.
And when the king came from Damascus, the king saw the altar. And the king drew near to the altar, and offered thereon.
And he burnt his burnt offering and his meal offering, and poured his drink offering, and sprinkled the blood of his peace offerings, upon the altar.
And the brazen altar, which was before Jehovah, he brought from the forefront of the house, from between his altar and the house of Jehovah, and put it on the north side of his altar.
And king Ahaz commanded Urijah the priest, saying, Upon the great altar burn the morning burnt offering, and the evening meal offering, and the king's burnt offering, and his meal offering, with the burnt offering of all the people of the land, and their meal offering, and their drink offerings. And sprinkle upon it all the blood of the burnt offering, and all the blood of the sacrifice. But the brazen altar shall be for me to inquire by.
Thus did Urijah the priest, according to all that king Ahaz commanded.
And king Ahaz cut off the panels of the bases, and removed the laver from off them, and took down the sea from off the brazen oxen that were under it, and put it upon a pavement of stone.
And the covered place for the sabbath that they had built in the house, and the king's entry outside, he turned from the house of Jehovah, because of the king of Assyria.
Now the rest of the acts of Ahaz which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

In the twelfth year of Ahaz king of Judah, Hoshea the son of Elah began to reign in Samaria over Israel, and reigned nine years.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, yet not as the kings of Israel who were before him.
Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against him. And Hoshea became his servant, and brought him tribute.
And the king of Assyria found conspiracy in Hoshea, for he had sent messengers to So king of Egypt, and offered no tribute to the king of Assyria, as he had done year by year. Therefore the king of Assyria shut him up, and bound him in prison.
Then the king of Assyria came up throughout all the land, and went up to Samaria, and besieged it three years.
In the ninth year of Hoshea, the king of Assyria took Samaria, and carried Israel away to Assyria, and placed them in Halah, and on the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes.
And it was so, because the sons of Israel had sinned against Jehovah their God who brought them up out of the land of Egypt from under the hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and had feared other gods,
and walked in the statutes of the nations, whom Jehovah cast out from before the sons of Israel, and of the kings of Israel, which they made.
And the sons of Israel did things secretly that were not right against Jehovah their God. And they built for them high places in all their cities, from the tower of the watchmen to the fortified city.
And they set up for them pillars and Asherim upon every high hill, and under every green tree,
and there they burnt incense in all the high places, as the nations did whom Jehovah carried away before them. And they wrought wicked things to provoke Jehovah to anger.
And they served idols, of which Jehovah had said to them, Ye shall not do this thing.
Yet Jehovah testified to Israel, and to Judah, by every prophet, and every seer, saying, Turn ye from your evil ways, and keep my commandments and my statutes, according to all the law which I commanded your fathers, and which I sent to you by my servants the prophets.
Notwithstanding, they would not hear, but stiffened their neck, like the neck of their fathers who did not believe in Jehovah their God.
And they rejected his statutes, and his covenant that he made with their fathers, and his testimonies which he testified to them. And they followed vanity, and became vain, and went after the nations that were round about them, concerning whom Jehovah had charged them that they should not do like them.
And they forsook all the commandments of Jehovah their God, and made for them molten images, even two calves, and made an Asherah, and worshiped all the host of heaven, and served Baal.
And they caused their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire, and used divination and enchantments, and sold themselves to do that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah to provoke him to anger.
Therefore Jehovah was very angry with Israel, and removed them out of his sight. There was none left but only the tribe of Judah.
Also Judah did not keep the commandments of Jehovah their God, but walked in the statutes of Israel which they made.
And Jehovah rejected all the seed of Israel, and afflicted them, and delivered them into the hand of spoilers, until he had cast them out of his sight.
For he tore Israel from the house of David. And they made Jeroboam the son of Nebat king. And Jeroboam drove Israel from following Jehovah, and made them sin a great sin.
And the sons of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which he did. They did not depart from them
until Jehovah removed Israel out of his sight, as he spoke by all his servants the prophets. So Israel was carried away out of their own land to Assyria to this day.
And the king of Assyria brought men from Babylon, and from Cuthah, and from Avva, and from Hamath and Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria instead of the sons of Israel. And they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the cities of it.
And so it was, at the beginning of their dwelling there, that they were not afraid of Jehovah. Therefore Jehovah sent lions among them, which killed some of them.
Therefore they spoke to the king of Assyria, saying, The nations which thou have carried away, and placed in the cities of Samaria know not the law of the god of the land. Therefore he has sent lions among them, and, behold, they kill them, because they do not know the law of the god of the land.
Then the king of Assyria commanded, saying, Carry there one of the priests whom ye brought from there, and let them go and dwell there. And let him teach them the law of the god of the land.
So one of the priests whom they had carried away from Samaria came and dwelt in Bethel, and taught them how they should fear Jehovah.
However every nation made gods of their own, and put them in the houses of the high places which the Samaritans had made, every nation in their cities wherein they dwelt.
And the men of Babylon made Succoth-benoth, and the men of Cuth made Nergal, and the men of Hamath made Ashima,
and the Avvites made Nibhaz and Tartak. And the Sepharvites burnt their sons in the fire to Adrammelech and Anammelech, the gods of Sepharvaim.
So they were afraid of Jehovah, and made for them priests of the high places from among themselves, who sacrificed for them in the houses of the high places.
They were afraid of Jehovah, and served their own gods, after the manner of the nations from among whom they had been carried away.
To this day they do after the former manner. They do not fear Jehovah, neither do they after their statutes, or after their ordinances, or after the law or after the commandment which Jehovah commanded the sons of Jacob, whom he named Israel,
with whom Jehovah had made a covenant, and charged them, saying, Ye shall not fear other gods, nor bow yourselves to them, nor serve them, nor sacrifice to them.
But Jehovah, who brought you up out of the land of Egypt with great power and with an outstretched arm, him ye shall fear, and to him ye shall bow yourselves, and to him ye shall sacrifice.
And the statutes and the ordinances, and the law and the commandment, which he wrote for you, ye shall observe to do for evermore. And ye shall not fear other gods.
And the covenant that I have made with you ye shall not forget. Neither shall ye fear other gods,
but ye shall ye fear Jehovah your God, and he will deliver you out of the hand of all your enemies.
However they did not hearken, but they did after their former manner.
So these nations were afraid of Jehovah, and served their graven images, their sons likewise, and their son's sons, as did their fathers, so do they to this day.

Now it came to pass in the third year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Hezekiah the son of Ahaz king of Judah began to reign.
He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Abi the daughter of Zechariah.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that David his father had done.
He removed the high places, and broke the pillars, and cut down the Asherah, and he broke in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made. For to those days the sons of Israel burned incense to it, and he called it Nehushtan.
He trusted in Jehovah, the God of Israel, so that there was none like him among all the kings of Judah after him, nor among those who were before him.
For he clung to Jehovah. He did not depart from following him, but kept his commandments, which Jehovah commanded Moses.
And Jehovah was with him. Wherever he went forth he prospered. And he rebelled against the king of Assyria, and did not serve him.
He smote the Philistines to Gaza and the borders of it, from the tower of the watchmen to the fortified city.
And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Hezekiah, which was the seventh year of Hoshea son of Elah king of Israel, that Shalmaneser king of Assyria came up against Samaria, and besieged it.
And at the end of three years they took it. Samaria was taken in the sixth year of Hezekiah, which was the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel.
And the king of Assyria carried Israel away to Assyria, and put them in Halah, and on the Habor, the river of Gozan, and in the cities of the Medes,
because they did not obey the voice of Jehovah their God, but transgressed his covenant, even all that Moses the servant of Jehovah commanded, and would not hear it, nor do it.
Now in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them.
And Hezekiah king of Judah sent to the king of Assyria to Lachish, saying, I have offended. Return from me. That which thou put on me I will bear. And the king of Assyria appointed to Hezekiah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver and thirty talents of gold.
And Hezekiah gave him all the silver that was found in the house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the king's house.
At that time Hezekiah cut off the gold from the doors of the temple of Jehovah, and from the pillars which Hezekiah king of Judah had overlaid, and gave it to the king of Assyria.
And the king of Assyria sent Tartan and Rab-saris and Rabshakeh from Lachish to king Hezekiah with a great army to Jerusalem. And they went up and came to Jerusalem. And when they came up, they came and stood by the conduit of the upper pool, which is on the highway of the fuller's field.
And when they had called to the king, there came out to them Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebnah the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder.
And Rabshakeh said to them, Say ye now to Hezekiah, Thus says the great king, the king of Assyria, What confidence is this in which thou trust?
Thou say (but they are but vain words), There is counsel and strength for the war. Now on whom do thou trust that thou have rebelled against me?
Now, behold, thou trust upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt, on which if a man leans it will go into his hand, and pierce it. So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust on him.
But if ye say to me, We trust in Jehovah our God, is that not he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away, and has said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar in Jerusalem?
Now therefore, I pray thee, give pledges to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
How then can thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
Have I now come up without Jehovah against this place to destroy it? Jehovah said to me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.
Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, and Shebnah, and Joah, said to Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language, for we understand it. And do not speak with us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people who are on the wall.
But Rabshakeh said to them, Has my master sent me to thy master, and to thee, to speak these words? Has he not sent me to the men who sit on the wall, to eat their own dung, and to drink their own urine with you?
Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language, and spoke, saying, Hear ye the word of the great king, the king of Assyria.
Thus says the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to deliver you out of his hand.
Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in Jehovah, saying, Jehovah will surely deliver us, and this city shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Do not hearken to Hezekiah. For thus says the king of Assyria, Make your peace with me, and come out to me. And eat ye every man of his vine, and every man of his fig tree, and drink ye every man the waters of his own cistern,
until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards, a land of olive trees and of honey, that ye may live, and not die. And do not hearken to Hezekiah when he persuades you, saying, Jehovah will deliver us.
Have any of the gods of the nations ever delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
Where are the gods of Hamath, and of Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah? Have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?
Who are they among all the gods of the countries that have delivered their country out of my hand, that Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?
But the people were silent, and did not answer him a word, for the king's commandment was, saying, Do not answer him.
Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah the son of Asaph the recorder, came to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.

And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he tore his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of Jehovah.
And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests (covered with sackcloth) to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.
And they said to him, Thus says Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy, for the sons have come to the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth.
It may be that Jehovah thy God will hear all the words of Rabshakeh whom the king of Assyria his master has sent to defy the living God, and will rebuke the words which Jehovah thy God has heard. Therefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.
So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
And Isaiah said to them, Thus shall ye say to your master, Thus says Jehovah, Do not be afraid of the words that thou have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.
Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he shall hear news, and shall return to his own land. And I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.
So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah, for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.
And when he heard say of Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, Behold, he comes out to fight against thee, he sent messengers again to Hezekiah, saying,
Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Do not let thy God in whom thou trust deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Behold, thou have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly. And shall thou be delivered?
Have the gods of the nations delivered them, which my fathers have destroyed, Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the sons of Eden that were in Telassar?
Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah?
And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it. And Hezekiah went up to the house of Jehovah, and spread it before Jehovah.
And Hezekiah prayed before Jehovah, and said, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sits above the cherubim, thou are the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth. Thou have made heaven and earth.
Incline thine ear, O Jehovah, and hear. Open thine eyes, O Jehovah, and see. And hear the words of Sennacherib, with which he has sent for him to defy the living God.
Of a truth, Jehovah, the kings of Assyria have laid waste the nations and their lands,
and have cast their gods into the fire, for they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone. Therefore they have destroyed them.
Now therefore, O Jehovah our God, save thou us, I beseech thee, out of his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou Jehovah are God alone.
Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Whereas thou have prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria, I have heard.
The virgin daughter of Zion has despised thee and laughed thee to scorn. The daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee.
Whom have thou defied and blasphemed? And against whom have thou exalted thy voice and lifted up thine eyes on high? Even against the Holy One of Israel.
By thy messengers thou have defied the Lord, and have said, With the multitude of my chariots I have come up to the height of the mountains, to the innermost parts of Lebanon. And I will cut down the tall cedars of it, and the choice fir trees of it. And I will enter into his farthest lodging-place, the forest of his fruitful field.
I have dug and drunk strange waters, and with the sole of my feet I will dry up all the rivers of Egypt.
Have thou not heard how I have done it long ago, and formed it of ancient times? Now I have brought it to pass, that thou should be to lay waste fortified cities into ruinous heaps.
Therefore their inhabitants were of small power, they were dismayed and confounded. They were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb, as the grass on the housetops, and as grain blasted before it is grown up.
But I know thy sitting down, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy raging against me.
Because of thy raging against me, and because thine arrogance has come up into my ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou came.
Ye shall eat this year that which grows of itself, and in the second year that which springs of the same. And in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of it.
And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.
For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and out of mount Zion those who shall escape. The zeal of Jehovah shall perform this.
Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come to this city, nor shoot an arrow there, neither shall he come before it with shield, nor cast up a mound against it.
By the way that he came, by the same shall he return, and he shall not come to this city, says Jehovah.
For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake, and for my servant David's sake.
And it came to pass that night, that the agent of Jehovah went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred eighty-five thousand. And when men arose early in the morning, behold, these were all dead bodies.
So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.
And it came to pass, as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer smote him with the sword, and they escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esar-haddon his son reigned in his stead.

In those days Hezekiah was sick to death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him, and said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Set thy house in order, for thou shall die, and not live.
Then he turned his face to the wall, and prayed to Jehovah, saying,
Remember now, O Jehovah, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept greatly.
And it came to pass, before Isaiah was gone out into the middle part of the city, that the word of Jehovah came to him, saying,
Turn back, and say to Hezekiah the prince of my people, Thus says Jehovah, the God of David thy father, I have heard thy prayer, I have seen thy tears. Behold, I will heal thee. On the third day thou shall go up to the house of Jehovah.
And I will add to thy days fifteen years. And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria. And I will defend this city for my own sake, and for my servant David's sake.
And Isaiah said, Take a cake of figs. And they took and laid it on the boil, and he recovered.
And Hezekiah said to Isaiah, What shall be the sign that Jehovah will heal me, and that I shall go up to the house of Jehovah the third day?
Shall the shadow go forward ten steps, or go back ten steps?
And Hezekiah answered, It is a light thing for the shadow to go forward ten steps. No, but let the shadow return backward ten steps.
And Isaiah the prophet cried to Jehovah, and he brought the shadow ten steps backward, by which it had gone down on the dial of Ahaz.
At that time Berodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he had heard that Hezekiah had been sick.
And Hezekiah hearkened to them, and showed them all the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious oil, and the house of his armor, and all that was found in his treasures. There was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah did not show them.
Then Isaiah the prophet came to king Hezekiah, and said to him, What did these men say, and from where did they come to thee? And Hezekiah said, They have come from a far country, even from Babylon.
And he said, What have they seen in thy house? And Hezekiah answered, They have seen all that is in my house. There is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.
And Isaiah said to Hezekiah, Hear the word of Jehovah.
Behold, the days come that all that is in thy house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store to this day, shall be carried to Babylon. Nothing shall be left, says Jehovah.
And of thy sons who shall issue from thee, whom thou shall beget, they shall take away. And they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.
Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, The word of Jehovah which thou have spoken is good. He said moreover, Is it not so, if peace and truth shall be in my days?
Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and all his might, and how he made the pool, and the conduit, and brought water into the city, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.

Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hephzibah.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to the abominations of the nations whom Jehovah cast out before the sons of Israel.
For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had destroyed. And he reared up altars for Baal, and made an Asherah, as did Ahab king of Israel, and worshiped all the host of heaven, and served them.
And he built altars in the house of Jehovah, of which Jehovah said, In Jerusalem I will put my name.
And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of Jehovah.
And he made his son to pass through the fire, and practiced augury, and used enchantments, and dealt with psychics, and with sorcery. He wrought much evil in the sight of Jehovah to provoke him to anger.
And he set the graven image of Asherah, that he had made, in the house of which Jehovah said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever.
Neither will I cause the feet of Israel to wander any more out of the land which I gave their fathers, if only they will observe to do according to all that I have commanded them, and according to all the law that my servant Moses commanded them.
But they did not hearken. And Manasseh seduced them to do that which is evil more than did the nations whom Jehovah destroyed before the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah spoke by his servants the prophets, saying,
Because Manasseh king of Judah has done these abominations, and has done wickedly above all that the Amorites did who were before him, and has made Judah also to sin with his idols,
therefore thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Behold, I bring such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah, that whoever hears of it, both his ears shall tingle.
And I will stretch over Jerusalem the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of Ahab. And I will wipe Jerusalem as a man wipes a dish, wiping it and turning it upside down.
And I will cast off the remnant of my inheritance, and deliver them into the hand of their enemies. And they shall become a prey and a spoil to all their enemies,
because they have done that which is evil in my sight, and have provoked me to anger, since the day their fathers came forth out of Egypt even to this day.
Moreover Manasseh shed very much innocent blood till he had filled Jerusalem from one end to another, besides his sin with which he made Judah to sin in doing that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and all that he did, and his sin that he sinned, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And Manasseh slept with his fathers, and was buried in the garden of his own house, in the garden of Uzza, and Amon his son reigned in his stead.
Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Meshullemeth the daughter of Haruz of Jotbah.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah as did Manasseh his father.
And he walked in all the way that his father walked in, and served the idols that his father served, and worshiped them.
And he forsook Jehovah, the God of his fathers, and did not walk in the way of Jehovah.
And the servants of Amon conspired against him, and put the king to death in his own house.
But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against king Amon. And the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.
Now the rest of the acts of Amon which he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
And he was buried in his sepulcher in the garden of Uzza, and Josiah his son reigned in his stead.

Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jedidah the daughter of Adaiah of Bozkath.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, and walked in all the way of David his father, and did not turn aside to the right hand or to the left.
And it came to pass, in the eighteenth year of king Josiah, that the king sent Shaphan, the son of Azaliah the son of Meshullam, the scribe, to the house of Jehovah, saying,
Go up to Hilkiah the high priest that he may sum the money which is brought into the house of Jehovah, which the keepers of the threshold have gathered of the people.
And let them deliver it into the hand of the workmen who have the oversight of the house of Jehovah. And let them give it to the workmen who are in the house of Jehovah, to repair the broken parts of the house,
to the carpenters, and to the builders, and to the masons, and for buying timber and hewn stone to repair the house.
However there was no reckoning made with them of the money that was delivered into their hand, for they dealt faithfully.
And Hilkiah the high priest said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of Jehovah. And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan, and he read it.
And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought the king word again, and said, Thy servants have emptied out the money that was found in the house, and have delivered it into the hand of the workmen who have the oversight of the house of Jehovah.
And Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest has delivered to me a book. And Shaphan read it before the king.
And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of the law, that he tore his clothes.
And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Achbor the son of Micaiah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king's servant, saying,
Go ye, inquire of Jehovah for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of this book that is found, for great is the wrath of Jehovah that is kindled against us, because our fathers have not hearkened to the words of this book to do according to all that which is written concerning us.
So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asaiah, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the wardrobe (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second quarter), and they conversed with her.
Tell ye the man who sent you to me,
Thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of it, even all the words of the book which the king of Judah has read.
Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the work of their hands, therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and it shall not be quenched.
As concerning the words which thou have heard,
because thy heart was tender, and thou humbled thyself before Jehovah when thou heard what I spoke against this place, and against the inhabitants of it, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and have torn thy clothes, and wept before me, I also have heard thee, says Jehovah.
Therefore, behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil which I will bring upon this place. And they brought the king word again.

And the king sent, and they gathered to him all the elders of Judah and of Jerusalem.
And the king went up to the house of Jehovah, and all the men of Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with him, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the people, both small and great. And he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant which was found in the house of Jehovah.
And the king stood by the pillar, and made a covenant before Jehovah to walk after Jehovah, and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and all his soul, to confirm the words of this covenant that were written in this book. And all the people stood to the covenant.
And the king commanded Hilkiah the high priest, and the priests of the second order, and the keepers of the threshold, to bring forth out of the temple of Jehovah all the vessels that were made for Baal, and for the Asherah, and for all the host of heaven, and he burned them outside Jerusalem in the fields of the Kidron, and carried the ashes of them to Bethel.
And he put down the idolatrous priests, whom the kings of Judah had ordained to burn incense in the high places in the cities of Judah, and in the places round about Jerusalem; those also who burned incense to Baal, to the sun, and to the moon, and to the planets, and to all the host of heaven.
And he brought out the Asherah from the house of Jehovah, outside Jerusalem, to the brook Kidron, and burned it at the brook Kidron, and beat it to dust, and cast the dust of it upon the graves of the common people.
And he broke down the houses of the sodomites that were in the house of Jehovah where the women wove hangings for the Asherah.
And he brought all the priests out of the cities of Judah, and defiled the high places where the priests had burned incense, from Geba to Beersheba. And he broke down the high places of the gates that were at the entrance of the gate of Joshua the governor of the city, which were on a man's left hand at the gate of the city.
Nevertheless the priests of the high places did not come up to the altar of Jehovah in Jerusalem, but they ate unleavened bread among their brothers.
And he defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the sons of Hinnom, that no man might make his son or his daughter to pass through the fire to Molech.
And he took away the horses that the kings of Judah had given to the sun, at the entrance of the house of Jehovah, by the chamber of Nathan-melech the chamberlain, which was in the suburbs. And he burned the chariots of the sun with fire.
And the altars that were on the roof of the upper chamber of Ahaz, which the kings of Judah had made, and the altars which Manasseh had made in the two courts of the house of Jehovah, the king broke down, and beat them down from there, and cast the dust of them into the brook Kidron.
And the king defiled the high places that were before Jerusalem, which were on the right hand of the mount of corruption, which Solomon the king of Israel had built for Ashtoreth the abomination of the Sidonians, and for Chemosh the abomination of Moab, and for Milcom the abomination of the sons of Ammon.
And he broke in pieces the pillars, and cut down the Asherim, and filled their places with the bones of men.
Moreover the altar that was at Bethel, and the high place which Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin, had made, even that altar and the high place he broke down. And he burned the high place and beat it to dust, and burned the Asherah.
And as Josiah turned himself, he noticed the sepulchers that were there in the mount. And he sent, and took the bones out of the sepulchers, and burned them upon the altar, and defiled it, according to the word of Jehovah which the man of God proclaimed, who proclaimed these things.
Then he said, What monument is that which I see? And the men of the city told him, It is the sepulcher of the man of God who came from Judah, and proclaimed these things that thou have done against the altar of Bethel.
And he said, Let him be; let no man move his bones. So they let his bones alone, with the bones of the prophet who came out of Samaria.
And Josiah also took away all the houses of the high places that were in the cities of Samaria, which the kings of Israel had made to provoke Jehovah to anger. And he did to them according to all the acts that he had done in Bethel.
And he killed all the priests of the high places that were there, upon the altars, and burned men's bones upon them. And he returned to Jerusalem.
And the king commanded all the people, saying, Keep the Passover to Jehovah your God, as it is written in this book of the covenant.
Surely such a Passover was not kept from the days of the judges who judged Israel, nor in all the days of the kings of Israel, nor of the kings of Judah.
But in the eighteenth year of king Josiah this Passover was kept to Jehovah in Jerusalem.
Moreover Josiah put away the psychics, and the wizards, and the teraphim, and the idols, and all the abominations that were seen in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, that he might perform the words of the law which were written in the book that Hilkiah the priest found in the house of Jehovah.
And there was no king before him like him, who turned to Jehovah with all his heart, and with all his soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses; neither arose any like him after him.
Notwithstanding, Jehovah did not turn from the fierceness of his great wrath, with which his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations with which Manasseh had provoked him.
And Jehovah said, I will remove Judah also out of my sight as I have removed Israel, and I will cast off this city which I have chosen, even Jerusalem, and the house of which I said, My name shall be there.
Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
In his days Pharaoh-necoh king of Egypt went up against the king of Assyria to the river Euphrates, and king Josiah went against him. And Pharaoh-necoh killed him at Megiddo when he had seen him.
And his servants carried him in a chariot dead from Megiddo, and brought him to Jerusalem, and buried him in his own sepulcher. And the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and anointed him, and made him king in his father's stead.
Jehoahaz was twenty-three years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that his fathers had done.
And Pharaoh-necoh put him in bonds at Riblah in the land of Hamath, that he might not reign in Jerusalem. And he put the land to a tribute of a hundred talents of silver, and a talent of gold.
And Pharaoh-necoh made Eliakim the son of Josiah king in the place of Josiah his father, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. But he took Jehoahaz away, and he came to Egypt, and died there.
And Jehoiakim gave the silver and the gold to Pharaoh, but he taxed the land to give the money according to the commandment of Pharaoh. He exacted the silver and the gold from the people of the land, of every one according to his taxation, to give it to Pharaoh-necoh.
Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zebidah the daughter of Pedaiah of Rumah.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that his fathers had done.

In his days Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up, and Jehoiakim became his servant three years. Then he turned and rebelled against him.
And Jehovah sent against him bands of the Chaldeans, and bands of the Syrians, and bands of the Moabites, and bands of the sons of Ammon, and sent them against Judah to destroy it, according to the word of Jehovah, which he spoke by his servants the prophets.
Surely at the commandment of Jehovah this came upon Judah, to remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that he did,
and also for the innocent blood that he shed, for he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, and Jehovah would not pardon.
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and all that he did, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Judah?
So Jehoiakim slept with his fathers, and Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.
And the king of Egypt did not come again any more out of his land, for the king of Babylon had taken, from the brook of Egypt to the river Euphrates, all that pertained to the king of Egypt.
Jehoiachin was eighteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem three months. And his mother's name was Nehushta the daughter of Elnathan of Jerusalem.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that his father had done.
At that time the servants of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up to Jerusalem, and the city was besieged.
And Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to the city while his servants were besieging it.
And Jehoiachin the king of Judah went out to the king of Babylon, he, and his mother, and his servants, and his princes, and his officers. And the king of Babylon took him in the eighth year of his reign.
And he carried out from there all the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king's house, and cut in pieces all the vessels of gold, which Solomon king of Israel had made in the temple of Jehovah, as Jehovah had said.
And he carried away all Jerusalem, and all the rulers, and all the mighty men of valor, even ten thousand captives, and all the craftsmen and the blacksmiths. None remained except the poorest sort of the people of the land.
And he carried away Jehoiachin to Babylon. And the king's mother, and the king's wives, and his officers, and the chief men of the land, he carried into captivity from Jerusalem to Babylon.
And all the men of might, even seven thousand, and the craftsmen and the blacksmiths a thousand, all of them strong and apt for war, even them the king of Babylon brought captive to Babylon.
And the king of Babylon made Mattaniah, Jehoiachin's father's brother, king is his stead, and changed his name to Zedekiah.
Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
For it came to pass in Jerusalem and Judah through the anger of Jehovah, until he had cast them out from his presence. And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.

And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army, against Jerusalem, and encamped against it. And they built forts against it round about.
So the city was besieged to the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.
On the ninth day of the fourth month the famine was severe in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land.
Then a breach was made in the city, and all the men of war fled by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden (now the Chaldeans were against the city round about), and the king went by the way of the Arabah.
But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook him in the plains of Jericho. And all his army was scattered from him.
Then they took the king, and carried him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah. And they gave judgment upon him.
And they killed the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in fetters, and carried him to Babylon.
Now in the fifth month, on the seventh day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, a servant of the king of Babylon, came to Jerusalem.
And he burnt the house of Jehovah, and the king's house. And all the houses of Jerusalem, even every great house, he burnt with fire.
And all the army of the Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the guard, broke down the walls of Jerusalem round about.
And the remnant of the people that were left in the city, and those that fell away, that fell to the king of Babylon, and the remnant of the multitude, Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive.
But the captain of the guard left of the poorest of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.
And the pillars of brass that were in the house of Jehovah, and the bases and the brazen sea that were in the house of Jehovah, the Chaldeans broke in pieces, and carried the brass of them to Babylon.
And they took away the pots, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass with which they ministered.
And the captain of the guard took away the firepans, and the basins, that which was of gold, in gold, and that which was of silver, in silver.
The two pillars, the one sea, and the bases, which Solomon had made for the house of Jehovah, the brass of all these vessels was without weight.
The height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, and a capital of brass was upon it. And the height of the capital was three cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the capital round about, all of brass. And the second pillar had like these with network.
And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the threshold.
And he took an officer out of the city who was set over the men of war; and five men of those who saw the king's face, who were found in the city; and the scribe, the captain of the army, who mustered the people of the land; and sixty men of the people of the land who were found in the city.
And Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.
And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away captive out of his land.
And as for the people who were left in the land of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had left, he made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, governor over them.
Now when all the captains of the forces, they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah governor, they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, even Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth the Netophathite, and Jaazaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their men.
And Gedaliah swore to them and to their men, and said to them, Fear not because of the servants of the Chaldeans. Dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you.
But it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the royal seed, came, and ten men with him, and smote Gedaliah, so that he died, and the Jews and the Chaldeans who were with him at Mizpah.
And all the people, both small and great, and the captains of the forces, arose, and came to Egypt, for they were afraid of the Chaldeans.
And it came to pass in the thirty-seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, on the twenty-seventh day of the month, that Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the year that he began to reign, lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah out of prison.
And he spoke kindly to him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in Babylon,
and changed his prison garments. And Jehoiachin ate bread before him continually all the days of his life,
and for his allowance. There was a continual allowance given him from the king, every day a portion, all the days of his life.

I Chronicles

Adam, Seth, Enosh,
Kenan, Mahalalel, Jared,
Enoch, Methuselah, Lamech,
Noah, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
Ashkenaz, and Diphath, and Togarmah.
Elishah, and Tarshish, Kittim, and Rodanim.
Cush, and Mizraim, Put, and Canaan.
Sheba, and Dedan.
And Cush begot Nimrod; he began to be a mighty one on the earth.
And Mizraim begot Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim,
and Pathrusim, and Casluhim (from whence came the Philistines), and Caphtorim.
And Canaan begot Sidon his firstborn, and Heth,
and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite,
and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite.
Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech.
And Arphaxad begot Shelah, and Shelah begot Eber.
And to Eber were born two sons. The name of the one was Peleg, for in his days the earth was divided. And his brother's name was Joktan.
And Joktan begot Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,
and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
and Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab; all these were the sons of Joktan.
Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah,
Eber, Peleg, Reu,
Serug, Nahor, Terah,
Abram (the same is Abraham).
Isaac and Ishmael.
the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth, then Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam,
Mishma, and Dumah, Massa, Hadad, and Tema,
Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah. These are the sons of Ishmael.
Sheba, and Dedan.
Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these were the sons of Keturah.
Esau and Israel.
Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jalam, and Korah.
Teman, and Omar, Zephi, and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, and Amalek.
Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.
Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan.
Hori, and Homam. And Timna was Lotan's sister.
Aiah, and Anah.
Hamran, and Eshban, and Ithran, and Cheran.
Uz, and Aran.
Bela the son of Beor. And the name of his city was Dinhabah.
And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead.
And Husham died, and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead. And the name of his city was Avith.
And Hadad died, and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
And Samlah died, and Shaul of Rehoboth by the River reigned in his stead.
And Shaul died, and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
And Baal-hanan died, and Hadad reigned in his stead. And the name of his city was Pai, and his wife's name was Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Me-zahab.
chief Timna, chief Aliah, chief Jetheth,
chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
chief Magdiel, chief Iram. These are the chiefs of Edom.

Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah, Issachar, and Zebulun,
Dan, Joseph, and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad, and Asher.
Er, and Onan, and Shelah, which three were born to him of Shua's daughter the Canaanitess. And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of Jehovah, and he killed him.
And Tamar his daughter-in-law bore for him Perez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were five.
Hezron, and Hamul.
Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara; five of them in all.
Achar, the troubler of Israel who committed a trespass in the devoted thing.
Azariah.
Jerahmeel, and Ram, and Chelubai.
And Ram begot Amminadab, and Amminadab begot Nahshon, ruler of the sons of Judah.
And Nahshon begot Salmon, and Salmon begot Boaz,
and Boaz begot Obed, and Obed begot Jesse,
and Jesse begot his firstborn Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shimea the third,
Nethanel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,
Ozem the sixth, David the seventh.
Abishai, and Joab, and Asahel, three.
And Abigail bore Amasa. And the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite.
Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.
And Azubah died, and Caleb took to him Ephrath, who bore for him Hur.
And Hur begot Uri, and Uri begot Bezalel.
And afterward Hezron went in to the daughter of Machir the father of Gilead, whom he took to wife when he was sixty years old, and she bore for him Segub.
And Segub begot Jair, who had twenty-three cities in the land of Gilead.
And Geshur and Aram took the towns of Jair from them, with Kenath, and the villages of it, even sixty cities. All these were the sons of Machir the father of Gilead.
And after that Hezron was dead in Caleb-ephrathah, then Abijah, Hezron's wife bore for him Ashhur the father of Tekoa.
And the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were Ram the firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, Ahijah.
And Jerahmeel had another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam.
And the sons of Ram the firstborn of Jerahmeel were Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker.
Nadab, and Abishur.
And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail, and she bore for him Ahban, and Molid.
Seled, and Appaim; but Seled died without sons.
Ahlai.
Jether, and Jonathan; and Jether died without sons.
Peleth, and Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel.
Now Sheshan had no sons, but daughters. And Sheshan had a servant, an Egyptian, whose name was Jarha.
And Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant to wife, and she bore for him Attai.
And Attai begot Nathan, and Nathan begot Zabad,
and Zabad begot Ephlal, and Ephlal begot Obed,
and Obed begot Jehu, and Jehu begot Azariah,
and Azariah begot Helez, and Helez begot Eleasah,
and Eleasah begot Sismai, and Sismai begot Shallum,
and Shallum begot Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begot Elishama.
And the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were Mesha his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph, and the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron.
Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema.
And Shema begot Raham, the father of Jorkeam, and Rekem begot Shammai.
And the son of Shammai was Maon, and Maon was the father of Beth-zur.
And Ephah, Caleb's concubine, bore Haran, and Moza, and Gazez. And Haran begot Gazez.
Regem, and Jothan, and Geshan, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph.
Maacah, Caleb's concubine, bore Sheber and Tirhanah.
She also bore Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbena, and the father of Gibea. And the daughter of Caleb was Achsah.
Shobal the father of Kiriath-jearim,
Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Beth-gader.
Haroeh, half of the Menuhothites,
The Ithrites, and the Puthites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zorathites and the Eshtaolites.
Bethlehem, and the Netophathites, Atroth-beth-joab, and half of the Manahathites, the Zorites.
the Tirathites, the Shimeathites, the Sucathites. These are the Kenites who came of Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab.

the firstborn, Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; the second, Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess;
the third, Absalom the son of Maacah the daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith;
the fifth, Shephatiah of Abital; the sixth, Ithream by Eglah his wife.
Six were born to him in Hebron, and he reigned there seven years and six months. And in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years.
Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bathsheba the daughter of Ammiel;
and Ibhar, and Elishama, and Eliphelet,
and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine.
All these were the sons of David, besides the sons of the concubines. And Tamar was their sister.
And Solomon's son was Rehoboam, Abijah his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,
Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,
Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,
Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,
Amon his son, Josiah his son.
the firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.
Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.
Shealtiel his son,
and Malchiram, and Pedaiah, and Shenazzar, Jekamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
Meshullam, and Hananiah; and Shelomith was their sister;
and Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, Jushab-hesed, five.
Pelatiah, and Jeshaiah; the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shecaniah.
Hattush, and Igal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.
Elioenai, and Hizkiah, and Azrikam, three.
Hodaviah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Delaiah, and Anani, seven.

Perez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal.
And Reaiah the son of Shobal begot Jahath. And Jahath begot Ahumai and Lahad. These are the families of the Zorathites.
Jezreel, and Ishma, and Idbash; and the name of their sister was Hazzelelponi;
and Penuel the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah. These are the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephrathah, the father of Bethlehem.
And Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.
And Naarah bore for him Ahuzzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Haahashtari. These were the sons of Naarah.
And the sons of Helah were Zereth, Izhar, and Ethnan.
And Hakkoz begot Anub, and Zobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.
And Jabez was more honorable than his brothers. And his mother called his name Jabez, saying, Because I bore him with sorrow.
And Jabez called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my border, and that thy hand might be with me, and that thou would keep me from evil, that it not be to my sorrow! And God granted him that which he requested.
And Chelub the brother of Shuhah begot Mehir, who was the father of Eshton.
And Eshton begot Beth-rapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of Ir-nahash. These are the men of Recah.
Hathath.
And Meonothai begot Ophrah. And Seraiah begot Joab the father of Ge-harashim, for they were craftsmen.
Kenaz.
Ziph, and Ziphah, Tiria, and Asarel.
Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon. And she bore Miriam, and Shammai, and Ishbah the father of Eshtemoa.
And his wife the Jewess bore Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Soco, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh, whom Mered took.
And the sons of the wife of Hodiah, the sister of Naham, were the fathers of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maacathite.
Zoheth, and Ben-zoheth.
Er the father of Lecah, and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of those who worked fine linen, of the house of Ashbea;
and Jokim, and the men of Cozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who had dominion in Moab, and Jashubilehem. And the records are ancient.
These were the potters, and the inhabitants of Netaim and Gederah. They dwelt there with the king for his work.
Nemuel, and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, Shaul;
Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.
Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son.
And Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters, but his brothers did not have many sons, neither did all their family multiply like the sons of Judah.
And they dwelt at Beersheba, and Moladah, and Hazarshual,
and at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad,
and at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag,
and at Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susim, and at Beth-biri, and at Shaaraim. These were their cities to the reign of David.
And their villages were Etam, and Ain, Rimmon, and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities.
And all their villages that were round about the same cities, to Baal. These were their habitations, and they have their genealogy.
And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah the son of Amaziah,
and Joel, and Jehu the son of Joshibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel,
and Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah,
and Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah-
these mentioned by name were rulers in their families, and their fathers' houses increased greatly.
And they went to the entrance of Gedor, even to the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks.
And they found lush and good pasture, and the land was wide and quiet and peaceable, for those who dwelt there formerly were of Ham.
And these written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and smote their tents, and the Meunim who were found there, and destroyed them utterly to this day, and dwelt in their stead because there was pasture there for their flocks.
And some of them, even of the sons of Simeon, five hundred men, went to mount Seir, having for their captains Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi.
And they smote the remnant of the Amalekites who escaped, and have dwelt there to this day.

And the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel (for he was the firstborn, but, inasmuch as he defiled his father's couch, his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel, and so the genealogy is not to be reckoned after the birthright.
Now Judah prevailed above his brothers, and the ruler came from him, but the birthright was Joseph's),
Hanoch, and Pallu, Hezron, and Carmi.
Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,
Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son,
Beerah his son, whom Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria carried away captive. He was ruler of the Reubenites.
the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah,
and Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who dwelt in Aroer, even to Nebo and Baal-meon.
And eastward he dwelt even to the entrance of the wilderness from the river Euphrates, because their cattle were multiplied in the land of Gilead.
And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagrites, who fell by their hand, and they dwelt in their tents throughout all the land east of Gilead.
Joel the chief, and Shapham the second, and Janai, and Shaphat in Bashan.
Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jacan, and Zia, and Eber, seven.
These were the sons of Abihail, the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz.
Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, was chief of their fathers' houses.
And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, and in its towns, and in all the suburbs of Sharon, as far as their borders.
All these were reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.
The sons of Reuben, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, of valiant men, men able to bear buckler and sword, and to shoot with bow, and skilful in war, were forty-four thousand seven hundred and sixty, who were able to go forth to war.
And they made war with the Hagrites, with Jetur, and Naphish, and Nodab.
And they were helped against them, and the Hagrites were delivered into their hand, and all that were with them, for they cried to God in the battle, and he was entreated by them because they put their trust in him.
of their camels fifty thousand, and of sheep two hundred and fifty thousand, and of donkeys two thousand, and of men a hundred thousand.
For there fell many slain, because the war was of God. And they dwelt in their stead until the captivity.
And the sons of the half-tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the land. They increased from Bashan to Baal-hermon and Senir and mount Hermon.
even Epher, and Ishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty men of valor, famous men, heads of their fathers' houses.
And they trespassed against the God of their fathers, and played the harlot after the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God destroyed before them.
And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, and the spirit of Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria, and he carried them away, even the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of Manasseh, and brought them to Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the river of Gozan to this day.

Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
Amram, Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.
Nadab, and Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar.
Eleazar begot Phinehas, Phinehas begot Abishua,
and Abishua begot Bukki, and Bukki begot Uzzi,
and Uzzi begot Zerahiah, and Zerahiah begot Meraioth,
Meraioth begot Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub,
and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok begot Ahimaaz,
and Ahimaaz begot Azariah, and Azariah begot Johanan,
and Johanan begot Azariah, (he it is who executed the priest's office in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem),
and Azariah begot Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub,
and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok begot Shallum,
and Shallum begot Hilkiah, and Hilkiah begot Azariah,
and Azariah begot Seraiah, and Seraiah begot Jehozadak.
And Jehozadak went into captivity when Jehovah carried away Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.
Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.
Libni and Shimei.
And the sons of Kohath were Amram, and Izhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.
Mahli and Mushi. And these are the families of the Levites according to their fathers.
Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,
Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeatherai his son.
Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,
Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son,
Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Shaul his son.
Amasai, and Ahimoth.
Zophai his son, and Nahath his son,
Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.
the firstborn Joel, and the second Abijah.
Mahli, Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzzah his son,
Shimea his son, Haggiah his son, Asaiah his son.
And these are those whom David set over the service of song in the house of Jehovah, after the ark had rest.
And they ministered with song before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting until Solomon had built the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem, and they served in their office according to their order.
Heman the singer, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel,
the son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah,
the son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai,
the son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah,
the son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,
the son of Izhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel.
And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand, even Asaph the son of Berechiah, the son of Shimea,
the son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchijah,
the son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,
the son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei,
the son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi.
Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch,
the son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkiah,
the son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shemer,
the son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi.
And their brothers the Levites were appointed for all the service of the tabernacle of the house of God.
But Aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of burnt offering, and upon the altar of incense, for all the work of the most holy place, and to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.
Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son,
Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,
Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,
Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.
Now these are their dwelling-places according to their encampments in their borders, to the sons of Aaron, of the families of the Kohathites (for theirs was the first lot),
to them they gave Hebron in the land of Judah, and the suburbs of it round about it.
But the fields of the city, and the villages of it, they gave to Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
And to the sons of Aaron they gave the cities of refuge, Hebron, Libnah also with its suburbs, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa with its suburbs,
and Hilen with its suburbs, Debir with its suburbs,
and Ashan with its suburbs, and Beth-shemesh with its suburbs.
And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Geba with its suburbs, and Allemeth with its suburbs, and Anathoth with its suburbs. All their cities throughout their families were thirteen cities.
And to the rest of the sons of Kohath were given by lot, out of the family of the tribe, out of the half-tribe, the half of Manasseh, ten cities.
And to the sons of Gershom, according to their families, out of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.
To the sons of Merari were given by lot, according to their families, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.
And the sons of Israel gave to the Levites the cities with their suburbs.
And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the sons of Judah, and out of the tribe of the sons of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the sons of Benjamin, these cities which are mentioned by name.
And some of the families of the sons of Kohath had cities of their borders out of the tribe of Ephraim.
And they gave to them the cities of refuge, Shechem in the hill-country of Ephraim with its suburbs, also Gezer with its suburbs,
and Jokmeam with its suburbs, and Beth-horon with its suburbs,
and Aijalon with its suburbs, and Gath-rimmon with its suburbs.
And out of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Aner with its suburbs, and Bileam with its suburbs, for the rest of the family of the sons of Kohath.
To the sons of Gershom were given out of the family of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Golan in Bashan with its suburbs, and Ashtaroth with its suburbs.
And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kedesh with its suburbs, Daberath with its suburbs,
and Ramoth with its suburbs, and Anem with its suburbs.
And out of the tribe of Asher, Mashal with its suburbs, and Abdon with its suburbs,
and Hukok with its suburbs, and Rehob with its suburbs.
And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with its suburbs, and Hammon with its suburbs, and Kiriathaim with its suburbs.
To the rest of the Levites, the sons of Merari, were given out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmono with its suburbs, Tabor with its suburbs.
And beyond the Jordan at Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan, were given them out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer in the wilderness with its suburbs, and Jahzah with its suburbs,
and Kedemoth with its suburbs, and Mephaath with its suburbs.
And out of the tribe of Gad, Ramoth in Gilead with its suburbs, and Mahanaim with its suburbs,
and Heshbon with its suburbs, and Jazer with its suburbs.

Tola, and Puah, Jashub, and Shimron, four.
Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Ibsam, and Shemuel, heads of their fathers' houses, namely, of Tola, mighty men of valor in their generations. Their number in the days of David was twenty-two thousand and six hundred.
Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, Isshiah, five; all of them chief men.
And with them, by their generations, after their fathers' houses, were bands of the army for war, thirty-six thousand, for they had many wives and sons.
And their brothers among all the families of Issachar, mighty men of valor, reckoned in all by genealogy, were eighty-seven thousand.
Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, three.
Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; heads of fathers' houses, mighty men of valor. And they were reckoned by genealogy twenty-two thousand and thirty-four.
Zemirah, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jeremoth, and Abijah, and Anathoth, and Alemeth. All these were the sons of Becher.
And they were reckoned by genealogy, after their generations, heads of their fathers' houses, mighty men of valor, twenty thousand and two hundred.
Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tarshish, and Ahishahar.
All these were sons of Jediael, according to the heads of their fathers, mighty men of valor, seventeen thousand and two hundred, who were able to go forth in the army for war.
Also the Shuppim, and the Huppim, the sons of Ir, and the Hushim, the sons of Aher.
Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.
Asriel, whom his concubine the Aramitess bore. She bore Machir the father of Gilead.
And Machir took a wife of Huppim and Shuppim, whose sister's name was Maacah, and the name of the second was Zelophehad. And Zelophehad had daughters.
And Maacah the wife of Machir bore a son, and she called his name Peresh. And the name of his brother was Sheresh, and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.
Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh.
And his sister Hammolecheth bore Ishhod, and Abiezer, and Mahlah.
And the sons of Shemida were Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam.
Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eleadah his son, and Tahath his son,
and Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elead, whom the men of Gath that were born in the land killed, because they came down to take away their cattle.
And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brothers came to comfort him.
And he went in to his wife, and she conceived, and bore a son, and he called his name Beriah, because it went evil with his house.
And his daughter was Sheerah, who built Beth-horon the lower and the upper, and Uzzen-sheerah.
And Rephah was his son, and Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son,
Ladan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,
Nun his son, Joshua his son.
And their possessions and habitations were Bethel and the towns of it, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer, with the towns of it, also Shechem and the towns of it, to Azzah and the towns of it,
and by the borders of the sons of Manasseh, Beth-shean and its towns, Taanach and its towns, Megiddo and its towns, Dor and its towns. In these dwelt the sons of Joseph the son of Israel.
Imnah, and Ishvah, and Ishvi, and Beriah, and Serah their sister.
Heber, and Malchiel, who was the father of Birzaith.
And Heber begot Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister.
Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath. These are the sons of Japhlet.
Ahi, and Rohgah, Jehubbah, and Aram.
Zophah, and Imna, and Shelesh, and Amal.
Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Imrah,
Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Ithran, and Beera.
Jephunneh, and Pispa, and Ara.
Arah, and Hanniel, and Rizia.
All these were the sons of Asher, heads of the fathers' houses, choice and mighty men of valor, chief of the rulers. And the number of them reckoned by genealogy for service in war was twenty-six thousand men.

And Benjamin begot Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third,
Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
Addar, and Gera, and Abihud,
and Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah,
and Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram.
Naaman, and Ahijah, and Gera. He carried them captive, and he begot Uzza and Ahihud.
And Shaharaim begot sons in the field of Moab after he had sent them away; Hushim and Baara were his wives.
And he begot of Hodesh his wife, Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcam,
and Jeuz, and Shachia, and Mirmah. These were his sons, heads of fathers.
And of Hushim he begot Abitub and Elpaal.
Eber, and Misham, and Shemed, who built Ono and Lod, with the towns of it,
and Beriah, and Shema (who were heads of fathers of the inhabitants of Aijalon who put the inhabitants of Gath to flight)
and Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth,
and Zebadiah, and Arad, and Eder,
and Michael, and Ishpah, and Joha, the sons of Beriah,
and Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hizki, and Heber,
and Ishmerai, and Izliah, and Jobab, the sons of Elpaal,
and Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi,
and Elienai, and Zillethai, and Eliel,
and Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath, the sons of Shimei,
and Ishpan, and Eber, and Eliel,
and Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan,
and Hananiah, and Elam, and Anthothijah,
and Iphdeiah, and Penuel, the sons of Shashak,
and Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah,
and Jaareshiah, and Elijah, and Zichri, the sons of Jeroham.
These were heads of fathers throughout their generations, chief men; these dwelt in Jerusalem.
And in Gibeon there dwelt the father of Gibeon Jeiel, whose wife's name was Maacah,
and his firstborn son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Nadab,
and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zecher.
And Mikloth begot Shimeah. And they also dwelt with their brothers in Jerusalem, opposite their brothers.
And Ner begot Kish, and Kish begot Saul, and Saul begot Jonathan, and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and Eshbaal.
And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal, and Merib-baal begot Micah.
Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and Ahaz.
And Ahaz begot Jehoaddah, and Jehoaddah begot Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza,
and Moza begot Binea. Raphah was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan. All these were the sons of Azel.
Ulam his firstborn, Jeush the second, and Eliphelet the third.
And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valor, archers, and had many sons, and sons' sons, a hundred and fifty. All these were of the sons of Benjamin.

So all Israel were reckoned by genealogies. And, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel. And Judah was carried away captive to Babylon for their transgression.
Now the first inhabitants who dwelt in their possessions in their cities were Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the Nethinim.
Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the sons of Perez the son of Judah.
Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons.
Jeuel, and their brothers, six hundred and ninety.
Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hassenuah,
and Ibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Ibnijah,
and their brothers, according to their generations, nine hundred and fifty-six. All these men were heads of fathers by their fathers' houses.
Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, Jachin,
and Azariah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God,
and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah, and Maasai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer,
and their brothers, heads of their fathers' houses, a thousand and seven hundred and sixty, very able men for the work of the service of the house of God.
Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari,
and Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal, and Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph,
and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun, and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, who dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites.
Shallum, and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brothers (Shallum was the chief),
who formerly served in the king's gate eastward. They were the porters for the camp of the sons of Levi.
And Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brothers, of his father's house, the Korahites, were over the work of the service, keepers of the thresholds of the tent. And their fathers had been over the camp of Jehovah, keepers of the entry.
And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was ruler over them in time past, and Jehovah was with him.
Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was porter of the door of the tent of meeting.
All these who were chosen to be porters in the thresholds were two hundred and twelve. These were reckoned by genealogy in their villages, whom David and Samuel the seer ordained in their office of trust.
So they and their sons had the oversight of the gates of the house of Jehovah, even the house of the tent, by wards.
On the four sides were the porters, toward the east, west, north, and south.
And their brothers, in their villages, were to come in every seven days from time to time to be with them;
for the four chief porters, who were Levites, were in an office of trust, and were over the chambers and over the treasuries in the house of God.
And they lodged round about the house of God, because the charge of it was upon them, and to them pertained the opening of it morning by morning.
And certain of them had charge of the vessels of service, for by count were these brought in, and by count were these taken out.
Some of them were also appointed over the furniture, and over all the vessels of the sanctuary, and over the fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.
And some of the sons of the priests prepared the confection of the spices.
And Mattithiah, one of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, had the office of trust over the things that were baked in pans.
And some of their brothers, of the sons of the Kohathites, were over the showbread to prepare it every sabbath.
And these are the singers, heads of fathers of the Levites, who dwelt in the chambers and were free from other service, for they were employed in their work day and night.
These were heads of fathers of the Levites, throughout their generations, chief men; these dwelt at Jerusalem.
And in Gibeon there dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, whose wife's name was Maacah,
and his firstborn son Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab,
and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth.
And Mikloth begot Shimeam. And they also dwelt with their brothers in Jerusalem, opposite their brothers.
And Ner begot Kish, and Kish begot Saul, and Saul begot Jonathan, and Malchi-shua, and Abinadab, and Eshbaal.
And the son of Jonathan was Merib-baal, and Merib-baal begot Micah.
Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea, and Ahaz.
And Ahaz begot Jarah, and Jarah begot Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza,
and Moza begot Binea, and Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
Azrikam, Bocheru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan; these were the sons of Azel.

Now the Philistines fought against Israel. And the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain in mount Gilboa.
And the Philistines followed hard after Saul and after his sons. And the Philistines killed Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, the sons of Saul.
And the battle went hard against Saul, and the archers overtook him. And he was wounded because of the archers.
Then Saul said to his armor bearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through therewith, lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. But his armor bearer would not, for he was very afraid. Therefore Saul took his sword, and fell upon it.
And when his armor bearer saw that Saul was dead, he likewise fell upon his sword, and died.
So Saul died, and his three sons. And all his house died together.
And when all the men of Israel who were in the valley saw that they fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook their cities, and fled. And the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
And it came to pass on the morrow, when the Philistines came to strip the slain, that they found Saul and his sons fallen in mount Gilboa.
And they stripped him, and took his head, and his armor, and sent into the land of the Philistines round about to carry the news to their idols, and to the people.
And they put his armor in the house of their gods, and fastened his head in the house of Dagon.
And when all Jabesh-gilead heard all that the Philistines had done to Saul,
all the valiant men arose, and took away the body of Saul, and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and buried their bones under the oak in Jabesh, and fasted seven days.
So Saul died for his trespass which he committed against Jehovah, because of the word of Jehovah, which he did not keep, and also because he asked counsel of a spiritist, to inquire thereby,
and did not inquire of Jehovah. Therefore he killed him, and turned the kingdom to David the son of Jesse.

Then all Israel gathered themselves to David to Hebron, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
In times past, even when Saul was king, it was thou who led out and brought in Israel. And Jehovah thy God said to thee, Thou shall be shepherd of my people Israel, and thou shall be ruler over my people Israel.
So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron. And David made a covenant with them in Hebron before Jehovah. And they anointed David king over Israel, according to the word of Jehovah by Samuel.
And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem (the same is Jebus), and the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land, were there.
And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shall not come in here. Nevertheless David took the stronghold of Zion; the same is the city of David.
And David said, Whoever smites the Jebusites first shall be chief and captain. And Joab the son of Zeruiah went up first, and was made chief.
And David dwelt in the stronghold. Therefore they called it the city of David.
And he built the city round about, from Millo even round about. And Joab repaired the rest of the city.
And David grew greater and greater, for Jehovah of hosts was with him.
Now these are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who showed themselves strong with him in his kingdom, together with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of Jehovah concerning Israel.
Jashobeam, the son of a Hachmonite, the chief of the thirty. He lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them at one time.
And after him was Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite, who was one of the three mighty men.
He was with David at Pasdammim, and there the Philistines were gathered together to battle, where was a plot of ground full of barley. And the people fled from before the Philistines.
And they stood in the midst of the plot, and defended it, and killed the Philistines. And Jehovah saved them by a great victory.
And three of the thirty chief men went down to the rock to David into the cave of Adullam. And the army of the Philistines was encamped in the valley of Rephaim.
And David was then in the stronghold, and the garrison of the Philistines was then in Bethlehem.
And David longed, and said, Oh that a man would give me water to drink of the well of Bethlehem, which is by the gate!
And the three broke through the army of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, that was by the gate, and took it, and brought it to David. But David would not drink of it, but poured it out to Jehovah,
and said, My God forbid it of me, that I should do this. Shall I drink the blood of these men who have put their lives in jeopardy? For with the jeopardy of their lives they brought it. Therefore he would not drink it. These things the three mighty men did.
And Abishai, the brother of Joab, he was chief of the three, for he lifted up his spear against three hundred and killed them, and had a name among the three.
Of the three, he was more famous than the two, and was made their captain. However he did not attain to the first three.
Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man of Kabzeel, who had done mighty deeds, he killed the two sons of Ariel of Moab. He also went down and killed a lion in the midst of a pit in time of snow.
And he killed an Egyptian, a man of great stature, five cubits high. And in the Egyptian's hand was a spear like a weaver's beam. And he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and killed him with his own spear.
These things Benaiah the son of Jehoiada did, and had a name among the three mighty men.
Behold, he was more famous than the thirty, but he did not attain to the first three. And David set him over his guard.
Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,
Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite,
Sibbecai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite,
Ithai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the sons of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite,
Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,
Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,
the sons of Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shagee the Hararite,
Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur,
Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,
Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,
Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Hagri,
Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armor bearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah,
Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai,
Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a chief of the Reubenites, and thirty with him,
Hanan the son of Maacah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,
Uzzia the Ashterathite, Shama and Jeiel the sons of Hotham the Aroerite,
Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,
Eliel the Mahavite, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Ithmah the Moabite,
Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.

Now these are those who came to David to Ziklag while he yet kept himself close because of Saul the son of Kish. And they were among the mighty men, his helpers in war.
They were armed with bows, and could use both the right hand and the left in slinging stones and in shooting arrows from the bow. They were of Saul's brothers of Benjamin.
The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite, and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth, and Beracah, and Jehu the Anathothite,
and Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty, and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Jozabad the Gederathite,
Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite,
Elkanah, and Isshiah, and Azarel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korahites,
and Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.
Ezer the chief, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third,
Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,
Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,
Jeremiah the tenth, Machbannai the eleventh.
These of the sons of Gad were captains of the army. He who was least was equal to a hundred, and the greatest to a thousand.
These are those who went over the Jordan in the first month when it had overflowed all its banks. And they put to flight all those of the valleys, both toward the east, and toward the west.
And there came of the sons of Benjamin and Judah to the stronghold to David.
And David went out to meet them, and answered and said to them, If ye have come peaceably to me to help me, my heart shall be knit to you, but if ye be come to betray me to my adversaries, seeing there is no wrong in my hands, the God of our fathers look thereon, and rebuke it.
Then the Spirit came upon Amasai, who was chief of the thirty, and he said, We are thine, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse. Peace, peace be to thee, and peace be to thy helpers, for thy God helps thee. Then David received them, and made them captains of the band.
From Manasseh also there fell away some to David when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle. But they did not help them, for the lords of the Philistines sent him away upon advisement, saying, He will fall away to his master Saul to the jeopardy of our heads.
As he went to Ziklag, there came to him from Manasseh, Adnah, and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zillethai, captains of thousands who were of Manasseh.
And they helped David against the band of rovers, for they were all mighty men of valor, and were captains in the army.
For from day to day men came to David to help him, until there was a great host, like the host of God.
And these are the numbers of the heads of those who were armed for war, who came to David to Hebron, to turn the kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of Jehovah.
The sons of Judah who bore shield and spear were six thousand and eight hundred, armed for war.
Of the sons of Simeon, mighty men of valor for the war, seven thousand and one hundred.
Of the sons of Levi four thousand and six hundred.
And Jehoiada was the leader of the house of Aaron. And with him were three thousand and seven hundred,
and Zadok, a young man mighty of valor, and of his father's house twenty-two captains.
And of the sons of Benjamin, the brothers of Saul, three thousand, for hitherto the greatest part of them had kept their allegiance to the house of Saul.
And of the sons of Ephraim twenty thousand and eight hundred, mighty men of valor, famous men in their fathers' houses.
And of the half-tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand, who were mentioned by name, to come and make David king.
And of the sons of Issachar, men who had understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do, the heads of them were two hundred. And all their brothers were at their commandment.
Of Zebulun, such as were able to go out in the army, who could set the battle in array, with all manner of instruments of war, fifty thousand, and who could order the battle array, and were not of double heart.
And of Naphtali a thousand captains, and with them thirty-seven thousand with shield and spear.
And of the Danites who could set the battle in array, twenty-eight thousand and six hundred.
And of Asher, such as were able to go out in the army, who could set the battle in array, forty thousand.
And on the other side of the Jordan, of the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and of the half-tribe of Manasseh, with all manner of instruments of war for the battle, a hundred and twenty thousand.
All these being men of war, who could order the battle array, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel. And all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king.
And they were there with David three days, eating and drinking, for their brothers had made preparation for them.
Moreover those who were near to them, even as far as Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on donkeys, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen, provisions of meal, cakes of figs, and clusters of raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep in abundance, for there was joy in Israel.

And David consulted with the captains of thousands and of hundreds, even with every leader.
And David said to all the assembly of Israel, If it seems good to you, and if it be of Jehovah our God, let us send abroad everywhere to our brothers who are left in all the land of Israel, with whom the priests and Levites are in their cities that have suburbs, that they may gather themselves to us.
And let us bring again the ark of our God to us, for we did not inquire from it in the days of Saul.
And all the assembly said that they would do so, for the thing was right in the eyes of all the people.
So David assembled all Israel together, from the Shihor the brook of Egypt even to the entrance of Hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kiriath-jearim.
And David went up, and all Israel, to Baalah, that is to Kiriath-jearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up from there the ark of God, Jehovah who sits above the cherubim that is called by the Name.
And they carried the ark of God upon a new cart, and brought it out of the house of Abinadab. And Uzza and Ahio drove the cart.
And David and all Israel played before God with all their might, even with songs, and with harps, and with psalteries, and with timbrels, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.
And when they came to the threshing-floor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark, for the oxen stumbled.
And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Uzza, and he smote him because he put forth his hand to the ark. And there he died before God.
And David was displeased, because Jehovah had broken forth upon Uzza. And he called that place Perez-uzza, to this day.
And David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shall I bring the ark of God home to me?
So David did not move the ark to him into the city of David, but carried it aside into the house of Obed-edom the Gittite.
And the ark of God remained with the family of Obed-edom in his house three months. And Jehovah blessed the house of Obed-edom, and all that he had.

And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and cedar trees, and masons, and carpenters, to build for him a house.
And David perceived that Jehovah had established him king over Israel, for his kingdom was exalted on high for his people Israel's sake.
And David took more wives at Jerusalem, and David begot more sons and daughters.
Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon,
and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpelet,
and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
and Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphelet.
And when the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all Israel, all the Philistines went up to seek David. And David heard of it, and went out against them.
Now the Philistines had come and made a raid in the valley of Rephaim.
And David inquired of God, saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines? And will thou deliver them into my hand? And Jehovah said to him, Go up, for I will deliver them into thy hand.
So they came up to Baal-perazim, and David smote them there. And David said, God has broken my enemies by my hand like the breach of waters. Therefore they called the name of that place Baal-perazim.
And they left their gods there. And David gave commandment, and they were burned with fire.
And the Philistines yet again made a raid in the valley.
And David inquired again of God. And God said to him, Thou shall not go up after them. Turn away from them, and come upon them opposite the mulberry trees.
And it shall be, when thou hear the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shall go out to battle. For God has gone out before thee to smite the army of the Philistines.
And David did as God commanded him, and they smote the army of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gezer.
And the fame of David went out into all lands. And Jehovah brought the fear of him upon all nations.

And David made for him houses in the city of David. And he prepared a place for the ark of God, and pitched a tent for it.
Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites, for Jehovah has them chosen to carry the ark of God, and to minister to him forever.
And David assembled all Israel at Jerusalem to bring up the ark of Jehovah to its place, which he had prepared for it.
of the sons of Kohath, Uriel the chief, and his brothers a hundred and twenty;
of the sons of Merari, Asaiah the chief, and his brothers two hundred and twenty;
of the sons of Gershom, Joel the chief, and his brothers a hundred and thirty;
of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah the chief, and his brothers two hundred;
of the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief, and his brothers eighty;
of the sons of Uzziel, Amminadab the chief, and his brothers a hundred and twelve.
And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Amminadab.
And said to them, Ye are the heads of the fathers of the Levites. Sanctify yourselves, both ye and your brothers, that ye may bring up the ark of Jehovah, the God of Israel, to the place that I have prepared for it.
For because ye did not at the first, Jehovah our God made a breach upon us, because we did not seek him according to the ordinance.
So the priests and the Levites sanctified themselves to bring up the ark of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
And the sons of the Levites bore the ark of God upon their shoulders with the staves thereon, as Moses commanded according to the word of Jehovah.
And David spoke to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brothers the singers, with instruments of music, psalteries and harps and cymbals, sounding aloud and lifting up the voice with joy.
So the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel. And of his brothers, Asaph the son of Berechiah. And of the sons of Merari their brothers, Ethan the son of Kushaiah.
And with them their brothers of the second degree, Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Eliphelehu, and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, the porters.
So the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, were appointed with cymbals of brass to sound aloud.
And Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with psalteries set to Alamoth.
And Mattithiah, and Eliphelehu, and Mikneiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps set to the Sheminith, to lead.
And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was over the song. He instructed about the song because he was skilful.
And Berechiah and Elkanah were porters for the ark.
And Shebaniah, and Joshaphat, and Nethanel, and Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, blew the trumpets before the ark of God. And Obed-edom and Jehiah were porters for the ark.
So David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the house of Obed-edom with joy.
And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites who bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, that they sacrificed seven bullocks and seven rams.
And David was clothed with a robe of fine linen, and all the Levites who bore the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah the master of the song with the singers. And David had upon him an ephod of linen.
Thus all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah with shouting, and with sound of the cornet, and with trumpets, and with cymbals, sounding aloud with psalteries and harps.
And it came to pass, as the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came to the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked out at the window, and saw king David dancing and playing. And she despised him in her heart.

And they brought in the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tent that David had pitched for it. And they offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before God.
And when David had made an end of offering the burnt offering and the peace offerings, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah.
And he dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread, and a portion of flesh, and a cake of raisins.
Asaph the chief, and second to him Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah, and Obed-edom, and Jeiel, with psalteries and with harps, and Asaph with cymbals, sounding aloud,
and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continually, before the ark of the covenant of God.
Then on that day David first ordained to give thanks to Jehovah by the hand of Asaph and his brothers.
O give thanks to Jehovah. Call upon his name. Make known his doings among the peoples.
Sing to him. Sing praises to him. Talk ye of all his marvelous works.
Glory ye in his holy name. Let the heart of those who seek Jehovah rejoice.
Seek ye Jehovah and his strength. Seek his face evermore.
Remember his marvelous works that he has done, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth,
O ye seed of Israel his servant, ye sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
He is Jehovah our God. His judgments are in all the earth.
Remember his covenant forever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
the covenant which he made with Abraham, and his oath to Isaac,
and confirmed the same to Jacob for a statute, to Israel for an everlasting covenant,
saying, To thee I will give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance,
when ye were but a few men in number, yea, very few, and sojourners in it,
and they went about from nation to nation, and from one kingdom to another people.
He allowed no man to do them wrong. Yea, he reproved kings for their sakes,
saying, Touch not my anointed ones, and do my prophets no harm.
Sing to Jehovah, all the earth. Show forth his salvation from day to day.
Declare his glory among the nations, his marvelous works among all the peoples.
For great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised. He also is to be feared above all gods.
For all the gods of the peoples are idols. But Jehovah made the heavens.
Honor and majesty are before him. Strength and gladness are in his place.
Ascribe to Jehovah, ye kindred of the peoples. Ascribe to Jehovah glory and strength.
Ascribe to Jehovah the glory due to his name. Bring an offering, and come before him. Worship Jehovah in holy array.
Tremble before him, all the earth. The world also is established that it cannot be moved.
Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice. And let them say among the nations, Jehovah reigns.
Let the sea roar, and the fullness of it. Let the field exult, and all that is therein.
Then shall the trees of the wood sing for joy before Jehovah, for he comes to judge the earth.
O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
And say ye, Save us, O God of our salvation. And gather us together and deliver us from the nations, to give thanks to thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.
Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting. And all the people said, Truly, and praised Jehovah.
So he left there, before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, Asaph and his brothers, to minister before the ark continually, as every day's work required,
and Obed-edom with their sixty-eight brothers. And Obed-edom the son of Jeduthun and Hosah were to be porters,
and Zadok the priest, and his brothers the priests, before the tabernacle of Jehovah in the high place that was at Gibeon,
to offer burnt offerings to Jehovah upon the altar of burnt offering continually morning and evening, even according to all that is written in the law of Jehovah, which he commanded to Israel.
And with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest that were chosen, who were mentioned by name, to give thanks to Jehovah because his loving kindness is forever.
And with them Heman and Jeduthun with trumpets and cymbals for those who should sound aloud, and with instruments for the songs of God, and the sons of Jeduthun to be at the gate.
And all the people departed every man to his house. And David returned to bless his house.

And it came to pass, when David dwelt in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet, Lo, I dwell in a house of cedar, but the ark of the covenant of Jehovah dwells under curtains.
And Nathan said to David, Do all that is in thy heart, for God is with thee.
And it came to pass the same night, that the word of God came to Nathan, saying,
Go and tell David my servant, Thus says Jehovah, Thou shall not build for me a house to dwell in.
For I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought up Israel, to this day, but have gone from tent to tent, and from one tabernacle to another.
In all places wherein I have walked with all Israel, did I speak a word with any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to be shepherd of my people, saying, Why have ye not built for me a house of cedar?
Now therefore thus thou shall say to my servant David, Thus says Jehovah of hosts, I took thee from the sheepfold, from following the sheep, that thou should be prince over my people Israel.
And I have been with thee wherever thou have gone, and have cut off all thine enemies from before thee. And I will make thee a name like the name of the great ones who are on the earth.
And I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in their own place, and be moved no more. Neither shall the sons of wickedness waste them any more, as at the first,
and as from the day that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel. And I will subdue all thine enemies. Moreover I tell thee that Jehovah will build for thee a house.
And it shall come to pass, when thy days are fulfilled that thou must go to be with thy fathers, that I will set up thy seed after thee, who shall be of thy sons. And I will establish his kingdom.
He shall build for me a house, and I will establish his throne forever.
I will be his father, and he shall be my son. And I will not take my loving kindness away from him as I took it from him who was before thee.
But I will settle him in my house and in my kingdom forever, and his throne shall be established forever.
According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so Nathan spoke to David.
Then David the king went in, and sat before Jehovah. And he said, Who am I, O Jehovah God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me thus far?
And this was a small thing in thine eyes, O God. But thou have spoken of thy servant's house for a great while to come, and have regarded me according to the estate of a man of high degree, O Jehovah God.
What can David say yet more to thee concerning the honor which is done to thy servant? For thou know thy servant.
O Jehovah, for thy servant's sake, and according to thine own heart, thou have wrought all this greatness, to make known all these great things.
O Jehovah, there is none like thee, neither is there any God besides thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
And what one nation on the earth is like thy people Israel, whom God went to redeem to himself for a people, to make thee a name by great and awesome things, in driving out nations from before thy people whom thou redeemed out of Egypt?
For thy people Israel thou made thine own people forever. And thou, Jehovah, became their God.
And now, O Jehovah, let the word that thou have spoken concerning thy servant, and concerning his house, be established forever, and do as thou have spoken.
And let thy name be established and magnified forever, saying, Jehovah of hosts is the God of Israel, even a God to Israel, and the house of David thy servant is established before thee.
For thou, O my God, have revealed to thy servant that thou will build him a house. Therefore thy servant has found in his heart to pray before thee.
And now, O Jehovah, thou are God, and have promised this good thing to thy servant,
and now it has pleased thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may continue for ever before thee; for thou, O Jehovah, have blessed, and it is blessed forever.

And after this it came to pass, that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them, and took Gath and its towns out of the hand of the Philistines.
And he smote Moab, and the Moabites became servants to David, and brought tribute.
And David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah to Hamath, as he went to establish his dominion by the river Euphrates.
And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen. And David hocked all the chariot horses, but reserved from them for a hundred chariots.
And when the Syrians of Damascus came to aid Hadarezer king of Zobah, David smote of the Syrians twenty-two thousand men.
Then David put garrisons in Syria of Damascus. And the Syrians became servants to David, and brought tribute. And Jehovah gave victory to David wherever he went.
And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadarezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.
And from Tibhath and from Cun, cities of Hadarezer, David took very much brass, with which Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.
And when Tou king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the army of Hadarezer king of Zobah,
he sent Hadoram his son to king David, to salute him, and to bless him, because he had fought against Hadarezer and smitten him (for Hadarezer had wars with Tou), and he had with him all manner of vessels of gold and silver and brass.
from Edom, and from Moab, and from the sons of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and from Amalek.
Moreover Abishai the son of Zeruiah smote eighteen thousand of the Edomites in the Valley of Salt.
And he put garrisons in Edom, and all the Edomites became servants to David. And Jehovah gave victory to David wherever he went.
And David reigned over all Israel, and he executed justice and righteousness to all his people.
And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the army, and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was recorder,
and Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, were priests, and Shavsha was scribe,
and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites, and the sons of David were chief about the king.

And it came to pass after this, that Nahash the king of the sons of Ammon died, and his son reigned in his stead.
And David said, I will show kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash, because his father showed kindness to me. So David sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. And David's servants came into the land of the sons of Ammon to Hanun, to comfort him.
But the rulers of the sons of Ammon said to Hanun, Do thou think that David honors thy father, in that he has sent comforters to thee? Have not his servants come to thee to search, and to overthrow, and to spy out the land?
So Hanun took David's servants, and shaved them, and cut off their garments in the middle, even to their buttocks, and sent them away.
And they came and informed David about the men. And he sent to meet them, for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said, Remain at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.
And when the sons of Ammon saw that they had made themselves odious to David, Hanun and the sons of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire for them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia, and out of Arammaacah, and out of Zobah.
So they hired for them thirty-two thousand chariots, and the king of Maacah and his people, who came and encamped before Medeba. And the sons of Ammon gathered themselves together from their cities, and came to battle.
And when David heard of it, he sent Joab, and all the army of the mighty men.
And the sons of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the gate of the city. And the kings that came were by themselves in the field.
Now when Joab saw that the battle was set against him in front and behind, he chose from all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians.
And the rest of the company he committed into the hand of Abishai his brother, and they put themselves in array against the sons of Ammon.
And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shall help me, but if the sons of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will help thee.
Be of good courage, and let us act the man for our people, and for the cities of our God. And Jehovah do that which seems good to him.
So Joab and the company that were with him drew near before the Syrians to the battle, and they fled before him.
And when the sons of Ammon saw that the Syrians had fled, they likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into the city. Then Joab came to Jerusalem.
And when the Syrians saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the Syrians that were beyond the River, with Shophach the captain of the army of Hadarezer at their head.
And it was told David. And he gathered all Israel together, and passed over the Jordan, and came upon them, and set the battle in array against them. So when David had put the battle in array against the Syrians, they fought with him.
And the Syrians fled before Israel. And David killed of the Syrians the men of seven thousand chariots, and forty thousand footmen, and killed Shophach the captain of the army.
And when the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were put to the worse before Israel, they made peace with David, and served him, neither would the Syrians help the sons of Ammon any more.

And it came to pass, at the time of the return of the year, at the time when kings go out to battle, that Joab led forth the army, and wasted the country of the sons of Ammon, and came and besieged Rabbah, but David remained at Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah, and overthrew it.
And David took the crown of their king from off his head, and found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in it. And it was set upon David's head, and he brought forth the spoil of the city, exceedingly much.
And he brought forth the people that were therein, and cut with saws, and with harrows of iron, and with axes. And thus David did to all the cities of the sons of Ammon. And David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer with the Philistines. Then Sibbecai the Hushathite killed Sippai of the sons of the giant, and they were subdued.
And there was again war with the Philistines. And Elhanan the son of Jair killed Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite, the staff of whose spear was like a weaver's beam.
And there was again war at Gath, where was a man of great stature whose fingers and toes were twenty-four, six on each hand, and six on each foot. And he also was born to the giant.
And when he defied Israel, Jonathan the son of Shimea David's brother killed him.
These were born to the giant in Gath, and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.

And Satan stood up against Israel, and moved David to number Israel.
And David said to Joab and to the princes of the people, Go, number Israel from Beersheba even to Dan, and bring me word that I may know the sum of them.
And Joab said, Jehovah make his people a hundred times as many as they are. But, my lord the king, are they not all my lord's servants? Why does my lord require this thing? Why will he be a cause of guilt to Israel?
Nevertheless the king's word prevailed against Joab. Therefore Joab departed, and went throughout all Israel, and came to Jerusalem.
And Joab gave up the sum of the numbering of the people to David. And all those of Israel were a million and a hundred thousand men who drew a sword. And Judah was four hundred seventy thousand men who drew a sword.
But he did not count Levi and Benjamin among them, for the king's word was abominable to Joab.
And God was displeased with this thing, therefore he smote Israel.
And David said to God, I have sinned greatly, in that I have done this thing. But now, put away, I beseech thee, the iniquity of thy servant, for I have done very foolishly.
And Jehovah spoke to Gad, David's seer, saying,
Go and speak to David, saying, Thus says Jehovah, I offer thee three things. Choose thee one of them, that I may do it to thee.
either three years of famine, or three months to be consumed before thy foes while the sword of thine enemies overtakes thee, or else three days the sword of Jehovah, even pestilence in the land, and the agent of Jehovah destroying throughout all the borders of Israel. Now therefore consider what answer I shall return to him who sent me.
And David said to Gad, I am in a great strait. Let me fall, I pray, into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercies are very great, and let me not fall into the hand of man.
So Jehovah sent a pestilence upon Israel, and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.
And God sent an agent to Jerusalem to destroy it. And as he was about to destroy, Jehovah beheld, and he relented of the evil, and said to the destroying agent, It is enough. Now halt thy hand. And the agent of Jehovah was standing by the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
And David lifted up his eyes, and saw the agent of Jehovah standing between earth and heaven, having a drawn sword in his hand stretched out over Jerusalem. Then David and the elders, clothed in sackcloth, fell upon their faces.
And David said to God, Is it not I who commanded the people to be numbered? Even I it is who have sinned and done very badly. But these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, O Jehovah my God, be against me, and against my father's house, but not against thy people, that they should be plagued.
Then the agent of Jehovah commanded Gad to say to David that David should go up, and rear an altar to Jehovah in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
And David went up at the saying of Gad, which he spoke in the name of Jehovah.
And Ornan turned back, and saw the agent, and his four sons who were with him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.
And as David came to Ornan, Ornan looked and saw David, and went out of the threshing-floor, and bowed himself to David with his face to the ground.
Then David said to Ornan, Give me the place of this threshing-floor, that I may build thereon an altar to Jehovah. For the full price thou shall give it me, that the plague may be stopped from the people.
And Ornan said to David, Take it to thee, and let my lord the king do that which is good in his eyes. Lo, I give thee the oxen for burnt offerings, and the threshing instruments for wood, and the wheat for the meal offering. I give it all.
And king David said to Ornan, No, but I will truly buy it for the full price. For I will not take that which is thine for Jehovah, nor offer a burnt offering without cost.
So David gave to Ornan for the place six hundred shekels of gold by weight.
And David built there an altar to Jehovah, and offered burnt offerings and peace offerings, and called upon Jehovah. And he answered him from heaven by fire upon the altar of burnt offering.
And Jehovah commanded the agent, and he put up his sword again into the sheath of it.
At that time, when David saw that Jehovah had answered him in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there.
For the tabernacle of Jehovah, which Moses made in the wilderness, and the altar of burnt offering, were at that time in the high place at Gibeon.
But David could not go before it to inquire of God, for he was afraid because of the sword of the agent of Jehovah.

Then David said, This is the house of Jehovah God, and this is the altar of burnt offering for Israel.
And David commanded to gather together the sojourners that were in the land of Israel. And he set masons to hew wrought stones to build the house of God.
And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of the gates, and for the couplings, and brass in abundance without weight,
and cedar trees without number. For the Sidonians and those of Tyre brought cedar trees in abundance to David.
And David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house that is to be built for Jehovah must be exceedingly magnificent, of fame and of glory throughout all countries. I will therefore make preparation for it. So David prepared abundantly before his death.
Then he called for Solomon his son, and charged him to build a house for Jehovah, the God of Israel.
And David said to Solomon his son, As for me, it was in my heart to build a house to the name of Jehovah my God.
But the word of Jehovah came to me, saying, Thou have shed blood abundantly, and have made great wars. Thou shall not build a house to my name because thou have shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.
Behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest. And I will give him rest from all his enemies round about, for his name shall be Solomon. And I will give peace and quietness to Israel in his days.
He shall build a house for my name. And he shall be my son, and I will be his father, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel forever.
Now, my son, Jehovah be with thee, and prosper thou, and build the house of Jehovah thy God as he has spoken concerning thee.
Only Jehovah give thee discretion and understanding, and give thee charge concerning Israel, so that thou may keep the law of Jehovah thy God.
Then thou shall prosper, if thou observe to do the statutes and the ordinances which Jehovah charged Moses with concerning Israel. Be strong, and of good courage. Fear not, neither be dismayed.
Now, behold, in my affliction I have prepared for the house of Jehovah a hundred thousand talents of gold, and a million talents of silver, and of brass and iron without weight, for it is in abundance. Also I have prepared timber and stone, and thou may add thereto.
Moreover there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and workers of stone and timber, and all men who are skilful in every manner of work.
Of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is no number. Arise and be doing, and Jehovah be with thee.
David also commanded all the rulers of Israel to help Solomon his son, saying,
Is not Jehovah your God with you? And has he not given you rest on every side? For he has delivered the inhabitants of the land into my hand, and the land is subdued before Jehovah, and before his people.
Now set your heart and your soul to seek after Jehovah your God. Arise therefore, and build ye the sanctuary of Jehovah God, to bring the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and the holy vessels of God, into the house that is to be built to the name of Jehovah.

Now David was old and full of days, and he made Solomon his son king over Israel.
And he gathered together all the rulers of Israel, with the priests and the Levites.
And the Levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward. And their number by their polls, man by man, was thirty-eight thousand.
Of these, twenty-four thousand were to oversee the work of the house of Jehovah. And six thousand were officers and judges,
and four thousand were porters, and four thousand praised Jehovah with the instruments which I made, David said, to praise therewith.
Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
Ladan and Shimei.
Jehiel the chief, and Zetham, and Joel, three.
Shelomoth, and Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the heads of the fathers of Ladan.
Jahath, Zina, and Jeush, and Beriah. These four were the sons of Shimei.
And Jahath was the chief, and Zizah the second. But Jeush and Beriah had not many sons. Therefore they became a fathers' house in one reckoning.
Amram, Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four.
Aaron and Moses. And Aaron was separated that he should sanctify the most holy things, he and his sons, forever, to burn incense before Jehovah, to minister to him, and to bless in his name, forever.
But as for Moses the man of God, his sons were named among the tribe of Levi.
Gershom and Eliezer.
Shebuel the chief.
Rehabiah the chief. And Eliezer had no other sons, but the sons of Rehabiah were very many.
Shelomith the chief.
Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
Micah the chief, and Isshiah the second.
Eleazar and Kish.
And Eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters only. And their brothers the sons of Kish took them to wife.
Mahli, and Eder, and Jeremoth, three.
These were the sons of Levi after their fathers' houses, even the heads of the fathers of those of them that were counted, in the number of names by their polls, who did the work for the service of the house of Jehovah, from twenty years old and upward.
For David said, Jehovah, the God of Israel, has given rest to his people, and he dwells in Jerusalem forever.
And also the Levites shall no more have need to carry the tabernacle and all the vessels of it for the service of it.
For by the last words of David the sons of Levi were numbered, from twenty years old and upward.
For their office was to wait on the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of Jehovah, in the courts, and in the chambers, and in the purifying of all holy things, even the work of the service of the house of God, also
for the showbread, and for the fine flour for a meal offering, whether of unleavened wafers, or of that which is baked in the pan, or of that which is soaked, and for all manner of measure and size.
And to stand every morning to thank and praise Jehovah, and likewise at evening.
And to offer all burnt offerings to Jehovah, on the sabbaths, on the new moons, and on the set feasts, in number according to the ordinance concerning them, continually before Jehovah.
And that they should keep the charge of the tent of meeting, and the charge of the holy place, and the charge of the sons of Aaron their brothers, for the service of the house of Jehovah.

Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
But Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and had no sons. Therefore Eleazar and Ithamar executed the priest's office.
And David with Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, divided them according to their ordering in their service.
of the sons of Eleazar there were sixteen heads of fathers' houses, and of the sons of Ithamar, according to their fathers' houses, eight.
Thus they were divided by lot, one sort with another. For there were rulers of the sanctuary, and rulers for God, both of the sons of Eleazar, and of the sons of Ithamar.
And Shemaiah the son of Nethanel the scribe, who was of the Levites, wrote them in the presence of the king, and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and the heads of the fathers of the priests and of the Levites, one fathers' house being taken for Eleazar, and one taken for Ithamar.
Now the first lot came forth to Jehoiarib, the second to Jedaiah,
the third to Harim, the fourth to Seorim,
the fifth to Malchijah, the sixth to Mijamin,
the seventh to Hakkoz, the eighth to Abijah,
the ninth to Jeshua, the tenth to Shecaniah,
the eleventh to Eliashib, the twelfth to Jakim,
the thirteenth to Huppah, the fourteenth to Jeshebeab,
the fifteenth to Bilgah, the sixteenth to Immer,
the seventeenth to Hezir, the eighteenth to Happizzez,
the nineteenth to Pethahiah, the twentieth to Jehezkel,
the twenty-first to Jachin, the twenty-second to Gamul,
the twenty-third to Delaiah, the twenty-fourth to Maaziah.
This was the ordering of them in their service, to come into the house of Jehovah according to the ordinance given to them by Aaron their father, as Jehovah, the God of Israel, had commanded him.
Of the sons of Amram, Shubael. Of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah.
of the sons of Rehabiah, Isshiah the chief.
Of the Izharites, Shelomoth. Of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath.
Jeriah the chief, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.
The sons of Uzziel, Micah. Of the sons of Micah, Shamir.
The brother of Micah, Isshiah. Of the sons of Isshiah, Zechariah.
Beno.
Of Jaaziah, Beno, and Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri.
Eleazar, who had no sons.
Jerahmeel.
Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites after their fathers' houses.
These likewise cast lots even as their brothers the sons of Aaron in the presence of David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the heads of the fathers of the priests and of the Levites, the fathers of the chief even as those of his younger brother.

Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asharelah, the sons of Asaph, under the hand of Asaph, who prophesied after the order of the king.
Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Jeshaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, six, under the hands of their father Jeduthun with the harp, who prophesied in giving thanks and praising Jehovah.
Bukkiah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamtiezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth.
All these were the sons of Heman the king's seer in the words of God, to lift up the horn. And God gave to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
All these were under the hands of their father for song in the house of Jehovah, with cymbals, psalteries, and harps, for the service of the house of God; Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman being under the order of the king.
And the number of them, with their brothers who were instructed in singing to Jehovah, even all who were skilful, was two hundred eighty-eight.
And they cast lots for their offices, all alike, as well the small as the great, the teacher as the scholar.
Now the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph, the second to Gedaliah (he and his brothers and sons were twelve),
the third to Zaccur, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
the fourth to Izri, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
the fifth to Nethaniah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
the sixth to Bukkiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
the seventh to Jesharelah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
the eighth to Jeshaiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
the ninth to Mattaniah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
the tenth to Shimei, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
the eleventh to Azarel, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
the twelfth to Hashabiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the thirteenth, Shubael, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the fourteenth, Mattithiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the fifteenth to Jeremoth, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the sixteenth to Hananiah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the seventeenth to Joshbekashah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the eighteenth to Hanani, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the nineteenth to Mallothi, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the twentieth to Eliathah, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the twenty-first to Hothir, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the twenty-second to Giddalti, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the twenty-third to Mahazioth, his sons and his brothers, twelve;
for the twenty-fourth to Romamtiezer, his sons and his brothers, twelve.

of the Korahites, Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.
Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,
Elam the fifth, Jehohanan the sixth, Eliehoenai the seventh.
Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethanel the fifth,
Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peullethai the eighth, for God blessed him.
Also sons were born to Shemaiah his son, who ruled over the house of their father, for they were mighty men of valor.
Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, Elzabad, whose brothers were valiant men, Elihu, and Semachiah.
All these were of the sons of Obed-edom, they and their sons and their brothers, able men in strength for the service, sixty-two of Obed-edom.
And Meshelemiah had sons and brothers, valiant men, eighteen.
Shimri the chief (for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him chief),
Hilkiah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth. All the sons and brothers of Hosah were thirteen.
Of these were the divisions of the porters, even of the chief men, having offices like their brothers to minister in the house of Jehovah.
And they cast lots, the small as well as the great, according to their fathers' houses for every gate.
And the lot eastward fell to Shelemiah. Then for Zechariah his son, a discreet counselor, they cast lots, and his lot came out northward.
To Obed-edom southward, and to his sons the store-house.
To Shuppim and Hosah westward, by the gate of Shallecheth, at the causeway that goes up, watch against watch.
Eastward were six Levites, four a day northward, four a day southward, and for the store-house two by two.
For Parbar westward, four at the highway, and two at Parbar.
These were the divisions of the porters, of the sons of the Korahites, and of the sons of Merari.
And of the Levites, Ahijah was over the treasures of the house of God, and over the treasures of the dedicated things.
Jehieli.
Zetham, and Joel his brother, over the treasures of the house of Jehovah.
Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was ruler over the treasures.
of Eliezer came Rehabiah his son, and Jeshaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomoth his son.
This Shelomoth and his brothers were over all the treasures of the dedicated things, which David the king, and the heads of the fathers, the captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the army, had dedicated.
They dedicated to repair the house of Jehovah out of the spoil won in battles.
And all that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah, had dedicated, whoever had dedicated anything, it was under the hand of Shelomoth, and of his brothers.
Of the Izharites, Chenaniah and his sons were for the outer business over Israel, for officers and judges.
Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brothers, men of valor, a thousand and seven hundred, had the oversight of Israel beyond the Jordan westward, for all the business of Jehovah, and for the service of the king.
Of the Hebronites was Jerijah the chief, even of the Hebronites, according to their generations by fathers. In the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there were found among them mighty men of valor at Jazer of Gilead.
And his brothers, men of valor, were two thousand and seven hundred, heads of fathers, whom king David made overseers over the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half-tribe of the Manassites, for every matter pertaining to God, and for the affairs of the king.

Now the sons of Israel after their number, namely, the heads of fathers and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and their officers who served the king, in any matter of the divisions which came in and went out month by month throughout all the months of the year-of every division were twenty-four thousand.
Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel was over the first division for the first month, and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
He was of the sons of Perez, the chief of all the captains of the army for the first month.
And over the division of the second month was Dodai the Ahohite, and his division. And Mikloth was the ruler. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
The third captain of the army for the third month was Benaiah, the son of Jehoiada the priest, being chief. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
This is that Benaiah who was the mighty man of the thirty, and over the thirty. And of his division was Ammizabad his son.
The fourth captain for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
The fifth captain for this fifth month was Shamhuth the Izrahite. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
The sixth captain for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
The seventh captain for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the sons of Ephraim. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
The eighth captain for the eighth month was Sibbecai the Hushathite, of the Zerahites. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
The ninth captain for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anathothite, of the Benjamites. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
The tenth captain for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zerahites. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
The eleventh captain for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the sons of Ephraim. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
The twelfth captain for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel. And in his division were twenty-four thousand.
of the Reubenites was Eliezer the son of Zichri the ruler; of the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maacah;
of Levi, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel; of Aaron, Zadok;
of Judah, Elihu, one of the brothers of David; of Issachar, Omri the son of Michael;
of Zebulun, Ishmaiah the son of Obadiah; of Naphtali, Jeremoth the son of Azriel;
of the sons of Ephraim, Hoshea the son of Azaziah; of the half-tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah;
of the half-tribe of Manasseh in Gilead, Iddo the son of Zechariah; of Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner;
of Dan, Azarel the son of Jeroham. These were the captains of the tribes of Israel.
But David did not take the number of them from twenty years old and under, because Jehovah had said he would increase Israel like the stars of heaven.
Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but did not finish. And wrath came for this upon Israel. Neither was the number put into the account in the chronicles of king David.
And over the king's treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel. And over the treasures in the fields, in the cities, and in the villages, and in the castles, was Jonathan the son of Uzziah.
And over those who did the work of the field for tillage of the ground was Ezri the son of Chelub.
And over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite. And over the increase of the vineyards for the wine-cellars was Zabdi the Shiphmite.
And over the olive trees and the sycamore trees that were in the lowland was Baal-hanan the Gederite. And over the cellars of oil was Joash.
And over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite. And over the herds that were in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai.
And over the camels was Obil the Ishmaelite. And over the donkeys was Jehdeiah the Meronothite. And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagrite.
All these were the rulers of the substance which was king David's.
Also Jonathan, David's uncle, was a counselor, a man of understanding, and a scribe. And Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king's sons.
And Ahithophel was the king's counselor. And Hushai the Archite was the king's friend.
And after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar. And the captain of the king's army was Joab.

And David assembled all the rulers of Israel, the rulers of the tribes, and the captains of the companies that served the king by division, and the captains of thousands, and the captains of hundreds, and the rulers over all the substance and possessions of the king and of his sons, with the officers, and the mighty men, even all the mighty men of valor, to Jerusalem.
Then David the king stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me, my brothers, and my people. As for me, it was in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and for the footstool of our God. And I had made ready for the building.
But God said to me, Thou shall not build a house for my name, because thou are a man of war, and have shed blood.
However Jehovah, the God of Israel, chose me out of all the house of my father to be king over Israel forever. For he has chosen Judah to be ruler, and in the house of Judah, the house of my father, and among the sons of my father he took pleasure in me to make me king over all Israel.
And of all my sons (for Jehovah has given me many sons), he has chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of Jehovah over Israel.
And he said to me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and my courts, for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his father.
And I will establish his kingdom forever, if he is constant to do my commandments and my ordinances, as at this day.
Now therefore, in the sight of all Israel, the assembly of Jehovah, and in the audience of our God, observe and seek out all the commandments of Jehovah your God, that ye may possess this good land, and leave it for an inheritance to your sons after you forever.
And thou, Solomon my son, know thou the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind, for Jehovah searches all hearts, and understands all the imaginations of the thoughts. If thou seek him, he will be found by thee, but if thou forsake him, he will cast thee off forever.
Take heed now, for Jehovah has chosen thee to build a house for the sanctuary. Be strong, and do it.
Then David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch of the temple, and of the houses of it, and of the treasuries of it, and of the upper rooms of it, and of the inner chambers of it, and of the place of the mercy-seat,
and the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, for the courts of the house of Jehovah, and for all the chambers round about, for the treasuries of the house of God, and for the treasuries of the dedicated things,
also for the divisions of the priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the service of the house of Jehovah, and for all the vessels of service in the house of Jehovah,
of gold by weight for the vessels of gold, for all vessels of every kind of service; of silver for all the vessels of silver by weight, for all vessels of every kind of service,
by weight also for the lampstands of gold, and for the lamps of it, of gold, by weight for every lampstand and for the lamps of it, and for the lampstands of silver, silver by weight for every lampstand and for the lamps of it, according to the use of every lampstand,
and the gold by weight for the tables of showbread, for every table, and silver for the tables of silver,
and the flesh-hooks, and the basins, and the cups, of pure gold, and for the golden bowls by weight for every bowl, and for the silver bowls by weight for every bowl,
and for the altar of incense refined gold by weight, and gold for the pattern of the chariot, even the cherubim that spread out their wings, and covered the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
All this, David said, I have been made to understand in writing from the hand of Jehovah, even all the works of this pattern.
And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and of good courage, and do it. Fear not, nor be dismayed, for Jehovah God, even my God, is with thee. He will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, until all the work for the service of the house of Jehovah be finished.
And, behold, there are the courses of the priests and the Levites for all the service of the house of God. And there shall be with thee in all manner of work every willing man who has skill, for any manner of service. Also the captains and all the people will be wholly at thy commandment.

And David the king said to all the assembly, Solomon my son, whom alone God has chosen, is yet young and tender, and the work is great, for the palace is not for man, but for Jehovah God.
Now I have prepared with all my might for the house of my God the gold for the things of gold, and the silver for the things of silver, and the brass for the things of brass, the iron for the things of iron, and wood for the things of wood, onyx stones, and stones to be set, stones for inlaid work, and of divers colors, and all manner of precious stones, and marble stones in abundance.
Moreover also, because I have set my affection on the house of my God, seeing that I have a treasure of my own of gold and silver, I give it to the house of my God over and above all that I have prepared for the holy house,
even three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, with which to overlay the walls of the houses,
of gold for the things of gold, and of silver for the things of silver, and for all manner of work to be made by the hands of artisans. Who then offers willingly to consecrate himself this day to Jehovah?
Then the rulers of the fathers, and the rulers of the tribes of Israel, and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, with the rulers over the king's work, offered willingly.
And they gave for the service of the house of God of gold five thousand talents and ten thousand darics, and of silver ten thousand talents, and of brass eighteen thousand talents, and of iron a hundred thousand talents.
And those with whom precious stones were found gave them to the treasure of the house of Jehovah under the hand of Jehiel the Gershonite.
Then the people rejoiced, because they offered willingly, because with a perfect heart they offered willingly to Jehovah. And David the king also rejoiced with great joy.
Therefore David praised Jehovah before all the assembly. And David said, Blessed be thou, O Jehovah, the God of Israel our father, forever and ever.
Thine, O Jehovah, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the majesty, for all that is in the heavens and on the earth is thine. Thine is the kingdom, O Jehovah, and thou are exalted as head above all.
Both riches and honor come of thee, and thou rule over all. And in thy hand is power and might. And in thy hand it is to make great, and to give strength to all.
Now therefore, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.
But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer so willingly after this sort? For all things come of thee, and of thine own have we given thee.
For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as all our fathers were. Our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is no abiding.
O Jehovah our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee a house for thy holy name comes of thy hand, and is all thine own.
I know also, my God, that thou try the heart, and have pleasure in uprightness. As for me, in the uprightness of my heart I have willingly offered all these things. And now I have seen with joy thy people, who are present here, offer willingly to thee.
O Jehovah, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this forever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and prepare their heart to thee.
And give to Solomon my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and to do all these things, and to build the palace for thee, for which I have made provision.
And David said to all the assembly, Now praise Jehovah your God. And all the assembly praised Jehovah, the God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and did obeisance to Jehovah, and the king.
And they sacrificed sacrifices to Jehovah, and offered burnt offerings to Jehovah on the morrow after that day, even a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, and a thousand lambs, with their drink offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel,
and ate and drank before Jehovah on that day with great gladness. And they made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed him to Jehovah to be prince, and Zadok to be priest.
Then Solomon sat on the throne of Jehovah as king instead of David his father, and prospered, and all Israel obeyed him.
And all the rulers, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of king David, submitted themselves to Solomon the king.
And Jehovah magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed upon him such royal majesty as had not been on any king before him in Israel.
Now David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.
And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years. He reigned seven years in Hebron, and he reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honor. And Solomon his son reigned in his stead.
Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the history of Samuel the seer, and in the history of Nathan the prophet, and in the history of Gad the seer,
with all his reign and his might, and the times that went over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries.

II Chronicles

And Solomon the son of David was strengthened in his kingdom. And Jehovah his God was with him, and magnified him exceedingly.
And Solomon spoke to all Israel, to the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and to the judges, and to every ruler in all Israel, the heads of the fathers.
So Solomon, and all the assembly with him, went to the high place that was at Gibeon. For the tent of meeting of God was there, which Moses the servant of Jehovah had made in the wilderness.
But the ark of God David had brought up from Kiriath-jearim to the place that David had prepared for it. For he had pitched a tent for it at Jerusalem.
Moreover the brazen altar, that Bezalel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, had made, was there before the tabernacle of Jehovah. And Solomon and the assembly sought to it.
And Solomon went up there to the brazen altar before Jehovah, which was at the tent of meeting, and offered a thousand burnt offerings upon it.
In that night God appeared to Solomon, and said to him, Ask what I shall give thee.
And Solomon said to God, Thou have shown great loving kindness to David my father, and have made me king in his stead.
Now, O Jehovah God, let thy promise to David my father be established. For thou have made me king over a people like the dust of the earth in multitude.
Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people. For who can judge this thy people, that is so great?
And God said to Solomon, Because this was in thy heart, and thou have not asked riches, wealth, or honor, nor the life of those who hate thee, neither yet have asked long life, but have asked wisdom and knowledge for thyself, that thou may judge my people over whom I have made thee king,
wisdom and knowledge are granted to thee. And I will give thee riches, and wealth, and honor, such as none of the kings have had who have been before thee, neither shall any after thee have the like.
So Solomon came from the high place that was at Gibeon, from before the tent of meeting, to Jerusalem, and he reigned over Israel.
And Solomon gathered chariots and horsemen. And he had a thousand and four hundred chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, that he placed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.
And the king made silver and gold to be in Jerusalem as stones, and cedars he made to be as the sycamore trees that are in the lowland, for abundance.
And the horses which Solomon had were brought out of Egypt. The king's merchants received them in herds, each herd at a price.
And they went after and brought out of Egypt a chariot for six hundred shekels of silver, and a horse for a hundred and fifty. And so they brought them out by their means for all the kings of the Hittites, and the kings of Syria.

Now Solomon purposed to build a house for the name of Jehovah, and a house for his kingdom.
And Solomon counted out seventy thousand men to bear burdens, and eighty thousand men who were hewers in the mountains, and three thousand and six hundred to oversee them.
And Solomon sent to Huram the king of Tyre, saying, As thou dealt with David my father, and sent him cedars to build for him a house to dwell therein, so with me.
Behold, I am about to build a house for the name of Jehovah my God, to dedicate it to him, and to burn before him incense of sweet spices, and for the continual showbread, and for the burnt offerings morning and evening, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the set feasts of Jehovah our God. This is an ordinance forever to Israel.
And the house which I build is great. For our God is great above all gods.
But who is able to build for him a house, seeing heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain him? Who am I then, that I should build for him a house, except only to burn incense before him?
Now therefore send me a man skilful to work in gold, and in silver, and in brass, and in iron, and in purple, and crimson, and blue, and who knows how to engrave engravings, to be with the skilful men who are with me in Judah and in Jerusalem, whom David my father provided.
Send to me also cedar trees, fir trees, and algum trees, out of Lebanon. For I know that thy servants know how to cut timber in Lebanon. And, behold, my servants shall be with thy servants,
even to prepare for me timber in abundance. For the house which I am about to build shall be great and wonderful.
And, behold, I will give to thy servants, the hewers who cut timber, twenty thousand measures of beaten wheat, and twenty thousand measures of barley, and twenty thousand baths of wine, and twenty thousand baths of oil.
Then Huram the king of Tyre answered in writing, which he sent to Solomon, Because Jehovah loves his people, he has made thee king over them.
Huram said moreover, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, that made heaven and earth, who has given to David the king a wise son, endued with discretion and understanding, that should build a house for Jehovah, and a house for his kingdom.
And now I have sent a skilful man, endued with understanding, of Huram my father's,
the son of a woman of the daughters of Dan. And his father was a man of Tyre, skilful to work in gold, and in silver, in brass, in iron, in stone, and in timber, in purple, in blue, and in fine linen, and in crimson, also to engrave any manner of engraving, and to devise any device, that there may be a place appointed to him with thy skilful men, and with the skilful men of my lord David thy father.
Now therefore the wheat and the barley, the oil and the wine, which my lord has spoken of, let him send to his servants.
And we will cut wood out of Lebanon, as much as thou shall need. And we will bring it to thee in floats by sea to Joppa, and thou shall carry it up to Jerusalem.
And Solomon numbered all the aliens that were in the land of Israel, after the numbering with which David his father had numbered them. And they were found a hundred and fifty-three thousand and six hundred.
And he set seventy thousand of them to bear burdens, and eighty thousand who were hewers in the mountains, and three thousand and six hundred overseers to set the people to work.

Then Solomon began to build the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem on mount Moriah, where Jehovah appeared to David his father, which he made ready in the place that David had appointed, in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
And he began to build in the second day of the second month, in the fourth year of his reign.
Now these are the foundations which Solomon laid for the building of the house of God. The length by cubits after the first measure was sixty cubits, and the breadth twenty cubits.
And the porch that was before the house, the length of it, according to the breadth of the house, was twenty cubits, and the height a hundred and twenty. And he overlaid it inside with pure gold.
And the greater house he ceiled with fir-wood, which he overlaid with fine gold, and wrought thereon palm trees and chains.
And he garnished the house with precious stones for beauty. And the gold was gold of Parvaim.
He also overlaid the house, the beams, the thresholds, and the walls of it, and the doors of it, with gold, and engraved cherubim on the walls.
And he made the most holy house; the length of it, according to the breadth of the house, was twenty cubits, and the breadth of it twenty cubits. And he overlaid it with fine gold, amounting to six hundred talents.
And the weight of the nails was fifty shekels of gold. And he overlaid the upper chambers with gold.
And in the most holy house he made two cherubim of image work, and they overlaid them with gold.
And the wings of the cherubim were twenty cubits long; the wing of the one was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house, and the other wing was likewise five cubits, reaching to the wing of the other cherub.
And the wing of the other cherub was five cubits, reaching to the wall of the house, and the other wing was five cubits also, joining to the wing of the other cherub.
The wings of these cherubim spread themselves forth twenty cubits. And they stood on their feet, and their faces were toward the house.
And he made the veil of blue, and purple, and crimson, and fine linen, and wrought cherubim thereon.
Also he made two pillars before the house of thirty-five cubits in length, and the capital that was on the top of each of them was five cubits.
And he made chains in the oracle, and put them on the tops of the pillars. And he made a hundred pomegranates, and put them on the chains.
And he set up the pillars before the temple, one on the right hand, and the other on the left. And called the name of that on the right hand Jachin, and the name of that on the left Boaz.

Moreover he made an altar of brass, twenty cubits the length of it, and twenty cubits the breadth of it, and ten cubits the height of it.
Also he made the molten sea of ten cubits from brim to brim, round in compass. And the height of it was five cubits, and a line of thirty cubits encompassed it round about.
And under it was the likeness of oxen, which compassed it round about for ten cubits, encompassing the sea round about. The oxen were in two rows, cast when it was cast.
It stood upon twelve oxen, three looking toward the north, and three looking toward the west, and three looking toward the south, and three looking toward the east. And the sea was set upon them above, and all their hinder parts were inward.
And it was a handbreadth thick. And the brim of it was wrought like the brim of a cup, like the flower of a lily. It received and held three thousand baths.
He also made ten basins, and put five on the right hand, and five on the left, to wash in them. They washed in them such things as belonged to the burnt offering, but the sea was for the priests to wash in.
And he made the ten lampstands of gold according to the ordinance concerning them. And he set them in the temple, five on the right hand, and five on the left.
He made also ten tables, and placed them in the temple, five on the right side, and five on the left. And he made a hundred basins of gold.
Furthermore he made the court of the priests, and the great court, and doors for the court, and overlaid the doors of them with brass.
And he set the sea on the right side of the house eastward, toward the south.
the two pillars, and the bowls, and the two capitals which were on the top of the pillars, and the two networks to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were on the top of the pillars,
and the four hundred pomegranates for the two networks, two rows of pomegranates for each network to cover the two bowls of the capitals that were upon the pillars.
He also made the bases, and he made the lavers upon the bases,
one sea, and the twelve oxen under it.
Also the pots, and the shovels, and the flesh-hooks, and all the vessels of it, Huram his father made of bright brass for king Solomon for the house of Jehovah.
The king cast them in the plain of the Jordan, in the clay ground between Succoth and Zeredah.
Thus Solomon made all these vessels in great abundance. For the weight of the brass could not be found out.
And Solomon made all the vessels that were in the house of God, also the golden altar, and the tables on which was the showbread,
and the lampstands with their lamps, to burn according to the ordinance before the oracle, of pure gold,
and the flowers, and the lamps, and the tongs, of gold, and that perfect gold,
and the snuffers, and the basins, and the spoons, and the fire pans, of pure gold. And as for the entry of the house, the inner doors of it for the most holy place, and the doors of the house, namely, of the temple, were of gold.

Thus all the work that Solomon wrought for the house of Jehovah was finished. And Solomon brought in the things that David his father had dedicated, even the silver, and the gold, and all the vessels, and put them in the treasuries of the house of God.
Then Solomon assembled the elders of Israel, and all the heads of the tribes, the rulers of the fathers of the sons of Israel, to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the city of David, which is Zion.
And all the men of Israel assembled themselves to the king at the feast, which was in the seventh month.
And all the elders of Israel came. And the Levites took up the ark.
And they brought up the ark, and the tent of meeting, and all the holy vessels that were in the tent. These the priests the Levites brought up.
And king Solomon and all the congregation of Israel that were assembled to him, were before the ark, sacrificing sheep and oxen that could not be counted nor numbered for multitude.
And the priests brought in the ark of the covenant of Jehovah to its place, into the oracle of the house, to the most holy place, even under the wings of the cherubim.
For the cherubim spread forth their wings over the place of the ark, and the cherubim covered the ark and the staves of it above.
And the staves were so long that the ends of the staves were seen from the ark before the oracle, but they were not seen outside. And there it is to this day.
There was nothing in the ark except the two tablets which Moses put there at Horeb when Jehovah made a covenant with the sons of Israel, when they came out of Egypt.
And it came to pass, when the priests came out of the holy place, (for all the priests that were present had sanctified themselves, and did not keep their divisions.
Also the Levites who were the singers, all of them, even Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, and their sons and their brothers, arrayed in fine linen, with cymbals and psalteries and harps, stood at the east end of the altar, and with them a hundred and twenty priests sounding with trumpets),
it came to pass, when the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking Jehovah. And when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of music, and praised Jehovah, saying, For he is good. For his loving kindness is forever, that the house was then filled with a cloud, even the house of Jehovah,
so that the priests could not stand to minister because of the cloud. For the glory of Jehovah filled the house of God.

Then Solomon spoke, Jehovah has said that he would dwell in the thick darkness.
But I have built for thee a house of habitation, and a place for thee to dwell in forever.
And the king turned his face, and blessed all the assembly of Israel. And all the assembly of Israel stood.
And he said, Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who spoke with his mouth to David my father, and has with his hands fulfilled it, saying,
Since the day that I brought forth my people out of the land of Egypt, I chose no city out of all the tribes of Israel to build a house in that my name might be there. Neither did I choose any man to be ruler over my people Israel.
But I have chosen Jerusalem that my name might be there. And have chosen David to be over my people Israel.
Now it was in the heart of David my father to build a house for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
But Jehovah said to David my father, Whereas it was in thy heart to build a house for my name, thou did well that it was in thy heart.
Nevertheless thou shall not build the house, but thy son who shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house for my name.
And Jehovah has performed his word that he spoke. For I have risen up in the place of David my father, and sit on the throne of Israel, as Jehovah promised, and have built the house for the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel.
And there I have set the ark in which is the covenant of Jehovah, which he made with the sons of Israel.
And he stood before the altar of Jehovah in the presence of all the assembly of Israel, and spread forth his hands.
For Solomon had made a brazen scaffold, five cubits long, and five cubits broad, and three cubits high, and had set it in the midst of the court. And upon it he stood, and knelt down upon his knees before all the assembly of Israel, and spread forth his hands toward heaven.
And he said, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, there is no God like thee, in heaven, or on earth, who keep covenant and loving kindness with thy servants, who walk before thee with all their heart,
who have kept with thy servant David my father that which thou promised him. Yea, thou spoke with thy mouth, and have fulfilled it with thy hand, as it is this day.
Now therefore, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, keep with thy servant David my father that which thou have promised him, saying, There shall not fail thee a man in my sight to sit on the throne of Israel, if only thy sons take heed to their way, to walk in my law as thou have walked before me.
Now therefore, O Jehovah, the God of Israel, let thy word be verified, which thou spoke to thy servant David.
But will God in very deed dwell with men on the earth? Behold, heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee. How much less this house which I have built!
Yet have thou respect to the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplication, O Jehovah my God, to hearken to the cry and to the prayer which thy servant prays before thee,
that thine eyes may be open toward this house day and night, even toward the place of which thou have said that thou would put thy name there, to hearken to the prayer which thy servant shall pray toward this place.
And hearken thou to the supplications of thy servant, and of thy people Israel, when they shall pray toward this place. Yea, hear thou from thy dwelling-place, even from heaven, and when thou hear forgive.
If a man sins against his neighbor, and an oath be laid upon him to cause him to swear, and he comes and swears before thine altar in this house,
then hear thou from heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, requiting the wicked, to bring his way upon his own head, and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his righteousness.
And if thy people Israel be smitten down before the enemy because they have sinned against thee, and shall turn again and confess thy name, and pray and make supplication before thee in this house,
then hear thou from heaven, and forgive the sin of thy people Israel, and bring them again to the land which thou gave to them and to their fathers.
When the heavens are shut up, and there is no rain, because they have sinned against thee, if they pray toward this place, and confess thy name, and turn from their sin when thou do afflict them,
then hear thou in heaven, and forgive the sin of thy servants, and of thy people Israel, when thou teach them the good way wherein they should walk, and send rain upon thy land, which thou have given to thy people for an inheritance.
If there be in the land famine, if there be pestilence, if there be blight or mildew, locust or caterpillar, if their enemies besiege them in the land of their cities, whatever plague or whatever sickness there be,
whatever prayer and supplication be made by any man, or by all thy people Israel, who shall know every man his own plague and his own sorrow, and shall spread forth his hands toward this house,
then hear thou from heaven thy dwelling-place and forgive, and render to every man according to all his ways, whose heart thou know, (for thou, even thou only, know the hearts of the sons of men),
that they may fear thee, to walk in thy ways so long as they live in the land which thou gave to our fathers.
Moreover concerning the foreigner, who is not of thy people Israel, when he shall come from a far country for thy great name's sake, and thy mighty hand, and thine outstretched arm, when they shall come and pray toward this house,
then hear thou from heaven, even from thy dwelling-place, and do according to all that the foreigner calls to thee for, that all the peoples of the earth may know thy name, and fear thee, as do thy people Israel, and that they may know that this house which I have built is called by thy name.
If thy people go out to battle against their enemies, by whatever way thou shall send them, and they pray to thee toward this city which thou have chosen, and the house which I have built for thy name,
then hear thou from heaven their prayer and their supplication, and maintain their cause.
If they sin against thee (for there is no man that sins not), and thou be angry with them, and deliver them to the enemy, so that they carry them away captive to a land far off or near,
yet if they shall rethink themselves in the land where they are carried captive, and turn again, and make supplication to thee in the land of their captivity, saying, We have sinned, we have done perversely, and have dealt wickedly,
if they return to thee with all their heart and with all their soul in the land of their captivity where they have carried them captive, and pray toward their land, which thou gave to their fathers, and the city which thou have chosen, and toward the house which I have built for thy name,
then hear thou from heaven, even from thy dwelling-place, their prayer and their supplications, and maintain their case, and forgive thy people who have sinned against thee.
Now, O my God, let, I beseech thee, thine eyes be open, and let thine ears be attendant to the prayer that is made in this place.
Now therefore arise, O Jehovah God, into thy resting-place, thou, and the ark of thy strength. Let thy priests, O Jehovah God, be clothed with salvation, and let thy sanctified rejoice in goodness.
O Jehovah God, do not turn away the face of thine anointed. Remember thy loving kindnesses to David thy servant.

Now when Solomon had made an end of praying, the fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt offering and the sacrifices. And the glory of Jehovah filled the house.
And the priests could not enter into the house of Jehovah, because the glory of Jehovah filled Jehovah's house.
And all the sons of Israel looked on when the fire came down, and the glory of Jehovah was upon the house. And they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshiped, and gave thanks to Jehovah, saying, For he is good. For his loving kindness is forever.
Then the king and all the people offered sacrifice before Jehovah.
And king Solomon offered a sacrifice of twenty-two thousand oxen, and a hundred and twenty thousand sheep. So the king and all the people dedicated the house of God.
And the priests stood according to their offices, also the Levites with instruments of music of Jehovah, which David the king had made to give thanks to Jehovah (for his loving kindness is forever) when David praised by their ministry, and the priests sounded trumpets before them. And all Israel stood.
Moreover Solomon hallowed the middle of the court that was before the house of Jehovah. For there he offered the burnt offerings, and the fat of the peace offerings, because the brazen altar which Solomon had made was not able to receive the burnt offering, and the meal offering, and the fat.
So Solomon held the feast at that time seven days, and all Israel with him, a very great assembly, from the entrance of Hamath to the brook of Egypt.
And on the eighth day they held a solemn assembly. For they kept the dedication of the altar seven days, and the feast seven days.
And on the twenty-third day of the seventh month he sent the people away to their tents, joyful and glad of heart for the goodness that Jehovah had shown to David, and to Solomon, and to Israel his people.
Thus Solomon finished the house of Jehovah, and the king's house. And all that came into Solomon's heart to make in the house of Jehovah, and in his own house, he caused to prosper.
And Jehovah appeared to Solomon by night, and said to him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for a house of sacrifice.
If I shut up the heavens so that there is no rain, or if I command the locust to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people,
if my people, who are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways, then I will hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land.
Now my eyes shall be open, and my ears attend to the prayer that is made in this place.
For now I have chosen and hallowed this house, that my name may be there forever, and my eyes and my heart shall be there perpetually.
And as for thee, if thou will walk before me as David thy father walked, and do according to all that I have commanded thee, and will keep my statutes and mine ordinances,
then I will establish the throne of thy kingdom, according as I covenanted with David thy father, saying, There shall not fail thee a man to be ruler in Israel.
But if ye turn away, and forsake my statutes and my commandments which I have set before you, and shall go and serve other gods, and worship them,
then I will pluck them up by the roots out of my land which I have given them. And this house, which I have hallowed for my name, I will cast out of my sight, and I will make it a proverb and a byword among all peoples.
And this house, which is so high, everyone who passes by it shall be astonished, and shall say, Why has Jehovah done thus to this land, and to this house?
And they shall answer, Because they forsook Jehovah, the God of their fathers, who brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, and laid hold on other gods, and worshiped them, and served them; therefore he has brought all this evil upon them.

And it came to pass at the end of twenty years, in which Solomon had built the house of Jehovah, and his own house,
that the cities which Huram had given to Solomon, Solomon built them, and caused the sons of Israel to dwell there.
And Solomon went to Hamath-zobah, and prevailed against it.
And he built Tadmor in the wilderness, and all the store-cities, which he built in Hamath.
Also he built Beth-horon the upper, and Beth-horon the lower, fortified cities, with walls, gates, and bars,
and Baalath, and all the store-cities that Solomon had, and all the cities for his chariots, and the cities for his horsemen, and all that Solomon desired to build for his pleasure in Jerusalem, and in Lebanon, and in all the land of his dominion.
As for all the people who were left of the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, that were not of Israel,
of their sons who were left after them in the land whom the sons of Israel did not consumed, of them Solomon raised a levy of bondservants to this day.
But Solomon made no servants of the sons of Israel for his work, but they were men of war, and chief of his captains, and rulers of his chariots and of his horsemen.
And these were the chief officers of king Solomon, even two hundred and fifty that bore rule over the people.
And Solomon brought up the daughter of Pharaoh out of the city of David to the house that he had built for her. For he said, My wife shall not dwell in the house of David king of Israel, because the places are holy in which the ark of Jehovah has come.
Then Solomon offered burnt offerings to Jehovah on the altar of Jehovah, which he had built before the porch,
even as the duty of every day required, offering according to the commandment of Moses, on the sabbaths, and on the new moons, and on the set feasts, three times in the year, even in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks, and in the feast of tabernacles.
And he appointed, according to the ordinance of David his father, the divisions of the priests to their service, and the Levites to their offices, to praise, and to minister before the priests, as the duty of every day required, also the porters by their divisions at every gate. For so David the man of God had commanded.
And they did not depart from the commandment of the king to the priests and Levites concerning any matter, or concerning the treasures.
Now all the work of Solomon was prepared from the day of the foundation of the house of Jehovah, and until it was finished. So the house of Jehovah was completed.
Then Solomon went to Ezion-geber, and to Eloth, on the seashore in the land of Edom.
And Huram sent ships to him by the hands of his servants, and servants who had knowledge of the sea. And they came with the servants of Solomon to Ophir, and fetched from there four hundred and fifty talents of gold, and brought them to king Solomon.

And when the queen of Sheba heard of the fame of Solomon, she came to test Solomon with hard questions at Jerusalem, with a very great caravan, and camels that bore spices, and gold in abundance, and precious stones. And when she came to Solomon, she conversed with him of all that was in her heart.
And Solomon answered to her all her questions. And there was not anything hid from Solomon that he did not answer her.
And when the queen of Sheba had seen the wisdom of Solomon, and the house that he had built,
and the food of his table, and the seating of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers, and their apparel, also his cupbearers, and their apparel, and his ascent by which he went up to the house of Jehovah, there was no more spirit in her.
And she said to the king, It was a true report that I heard in my own land of thine acts, and of thy wisdom.
However I did not believe their words until I came, and my eyes had seen it. And, behold, the half of the greatness of thy wisdom was not told me. Thou exceed the fame that I heard.
Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy servants, who stand continually before thee, and hear thy wisdom.
Blessed be Jehovah thy God, who delighted in thee, to set thee on his throne to be king for Jehovah thy God. Because thy God loved Israel, to establish them forever, therefore he made thee king over them, to do justice and righteousness.
And she gave the king a hundred and twenty talents of gold, and spices in great abundance, and precious stones. Neither was there any such spice as the queen of Sheba gave to king Solomon.
And also the servants of Huram, and the servants of Solomon, who brought gold from Ophir, brought algum trees and precious stones.
And the king made of the algum trees terraces for the house of Jehovah, and for the king's house, and harps and psalteries for the singers. And there were none such seen before in the land of Judah.
And king Solomon gave to the queen of Sheba all her desire, whatever she asked, besides that which she had brought to the king. So she turned, and went to her own land, she and her servants.
Now the weight of gold that came to Solomon in one year was six hundred and sixty-six talents of gold,
besides that which the traders and merchants brought. And all the kings of Arabia and the governors of the country brought gold and silver to Solomon.
And king Solomon made two hundred bucklers of beaten gold; six hundred shekels of beaten gold went to one buckler.
And he made three hundred shields of beaten gold; three hundred shekels of gold went to one shield. And the king put them in the house of the forest of Lebanon.
Moreover the king made a great throne of ivory, and overlaid it with pure gold.
And there were six steps to the throne, with a footstool of gold, which were fastened to the throne, and supports on either side by the place of the seat, and two lions standing beside the supports.
And twelve lions stood there on the one side and on the other upon the six steps. There was not the like made in any kingdom.
And all king Solomon's drinking vessels were of gold, and all the vessels of the house of the forest of Lebanon were of pure gold; silver was accounted of nothing in the days of Solomon.
For the king had ships that went to Tarshish with the servants of Huram. Once every three years the ships of Tarshish came, bringing gold, and silver, ivory, and apes, and peacocks.
So king Solomon exceeded all the kings of the earth in riches and wisdom.
And all the kings of the earth sought the presence of Solomon, to hear his wisdom, which God had put in his heart.
And they brought every man his tribute, vessels of silver, and vessels of gold, and raiment, armor, and spices, horses, and mules, a rate year by year.
And Solomon had four thousand stalls for horses and chariots, and twelve thousand horsemen, that he bestowed in the chariot cities, and with the king at Jerusalem.
And he ruled over all the kings from the River even to the land of the Philistines, and to the border of Egypt.
And the king made silver to be in Jerusalem as stones, and he made cedars to be as the sycamore trees that are in the lowland, for abundance.
And they brought horses for Solomon out of Egypt, and out of all lands.
Now the rest of the acts of Solomon, first and last, are they not written in the history of Nathan the prophet, and in the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite, and in the visions of Iddo the seer concerning Jeroboam the son of Nebat?
And Solomon reigned in Jerusalem over all Israel forty years.
And Solomon slept with his fathers, and he was buried in the city of David his father. And Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead.

And Rehoboam went to Shechem. For all Israel came to Shechem to make him king.
And it came to pass, when Jeroboam the son of Nebat heard of it, (for he was in Egypt, from where he had fled from the presence of king Solomon), that Jeroboam returned out of Egypt.
And they sent and called him. And Jeroboam and all Israel came, and they spoke to Rehoboam, saying,
Thy father made our yoke grievous. Now therefore make thou the grievous service of thy father, and his heavy yoke which he put upon us, lighter, and we will serve thee.
And he said to them, Come again to me after three days. And the people departed.
And king Rehoboam took counsel with the old men that had stood before Solomon his father while he yet lived, saying, What counsel do ye give me to return an answer to this people?
And they spoke to him, saying, If thou be kind to this people, and please them, and speak good words to them, then they will be thy servants forever.
But he forsook the counsel of the old men which they had given him, and took counsel with the young men that grew up with him, who stood before him.
And he said to them, What counsel do ye give, that we may return an answer to this people who have spoken to me, saying, Make the yoke that thy father put upon us lighter?
And the young men that grew up with him spoke to him, saying, Thus shall thou say to the people who spoke to thee, saying, Thy father made our yoke heavy, but make thou it lighter to us. Thus shall thou say to them, My little finger is thicker than my father's loins.
And now whereas my father burdened you with a heavy yoke, I will add to your yoke. My father chastised you with whips, but I with scorpions.
So Jeroboam and all the people came to Rehoboam the third day, as the king bade, saying, Come to me again the third day.
And the king answered them roughly. And king Rehoboam forsook the counsel of the old men,
and spoke to them after the counsel of the young men, saying, My father made your yoke heavy, but I will add thereto. My father chastised you with whips, but I with scorpions.
So the king did not hearken to the people. For it was brought about by God, that Jehovah might establish his word, which he spoke by Ahijah the Shilonite to Jeroboam the son of Nebat.
And when all Israel saw that the king did not hearken to them, the people answered the king, saying, What portion have we in David? Neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse. Every man to your tents, O Israel. Now see to thine own house, David. So all Israel departed to their tents.
But as for the sons of Israel who dwelt in the cities of Judah, Rehoboam reigned over them.
Then king Rehoboam sent Hadoram, who was over the men subject to task work. And the sons of Israel stoned him to death with stones. And king Rehoboam made speed to get him up to his chariot, to flee to Jerusalem.
So Israel rebelled against the house of David to this day.

And when Rehoboam came to Jerusalem, he assembled the house of Judah and Benjamin, a hundred and eighty thousand chosen men, who were warriors, to fight against Israel, to bring the kingdom again to Rehoboam.
But the word of Jehovah came to Shemaiah the man of God, saying,
Speak to Rehoboam the son of Solomon, king of Judah, and to all Israel in Judah and Benjamin, saying,
Thus says Jehovah, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brothers. Return every man to his house. For this thing is of me. So they hearkened to the words of Jehovah, and returned from going against Jeroboam.
And Rehoboam dwelt in Jerusalem, and built cities for defense in Judah.
He built Bethlehem, and Etam, and Tekoa,
And Beth-zur, and Soco, and Adullam,
and Gath, and Mareshah, and Ziph,
and Adoraim, and Lachish, and Azekah,
and Zorah, and Aijalon, and Hebron, which are in Judah and in Benjamin, fortified cities.
And he fortified the strongholds, and put captains in them, and stores of victuals, and oil and wine.
And in every city he put shields and spears, and made them exceedingly strong. And Judah and Benjamin belonged to him.
And the priests and the Levites who were in all Israel resorted to him out of all their border.
For the Levites left their suburbs and their possession, and came to Judah and Jerusalem. For Jeroboam and his sons cast them off, that they should not execute the priest's office to Jehovah.
And he appointed priests for him for the high places, and for the he-goats, and for the calves which he had made.
And after them, such as set their hearts to seek Jehovah, the God of Israel, came to Jerusalem out of all the tribes of Israel to sacrifice to Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
So they strengthened the kingdom of Judah, and made Rehoboam the son of Solomon strong three years. For they walked three years in the way of David and Solomon.
And Rehoboam took him a wife, Mahalath the daughter of Jerimoth the son of David, and of Abihail the daughter of Eliab the son of Jesse.
Jeush, and Shemariah, and Zaham.
And after her he took Maacah the daughter of Absalom. And she bore for him Abijah, and Attai, and Ziza, and Shelomith.
And Rehoboam loved Maacah the daughter of Absalom above all his wives and his concubines. For he took eighteen wives, and thirty concubines, and begot twenty-eight sons and thirty daughters.
And Rehoboam appointed Abijah the son of Maacah to be chief, the ruler among his brothers. For he intended to make him king.
And he dealt wisely, and dispersed all his sons throughout all the lands of Judah and Benjamin, to every fortified city. And he gave them provisions in abundance. And he sought for them many wives.

And it came to pass, when the kingdom of Rehoboam was established, and he was strong, that he forsook the law of Jehovah, and all Israel with him.
And it came to pass in the fifth year of king Rehoboam, that Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had trespassed against Jehovah,
the Lubim, the Sukkiim, and the Ethiopians.
And he took the fortified cities which pertained to Judah, and came to Jerusalem.
Now Shemaiah the prophet came to Rehoboam, and to the rulers of Judah, who were gathered together to Jerusalem because of Shishak, and said to them, Thus says Jehovah, Ye have forsaken me, therefore I have also left you in the hand of Shishak.
Then the rulers of Israel and the king humbled themselves, and they said, Jehovah is righteous.
And when Jehovah saw that they humbled themselves, the word of Jehovah came to Shemaiah, saying, They have humbled themselves. I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance, and my wrath shall not be poured out upon Jerusalem by the hand of Shishak.
Nevertheless they shall be his servants, that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the countries.
So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem, and took away the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king's house; he took all away. He also took away the shields of gold which Solomon had made.
And king Rehoboam made in their stead shields of brass, and committed them to the hands of the captains of the guard that kept the door of the king's house.
And it was so, that, as often as the king entered into the house of Jehovah, the guard came and bore them, and brought them back into the guard-chamber.
And when he humbled himself, the wrath of Jehovah turned from him, so as not to destroy him altogether. And moreover in Judah there were good things.
So king Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem, and reigned. For Rehoboam was forty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned seventeen years in Jerusalem, the city which Jehovah had chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put his name there. And his mother's name was Naamah the Ammonitess.
And he did that which was evil, because he did not set his heart to seek Jehovah.
Now the acts of Rehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the histories of Shemaiah the prophet and of Iddo the seer, after the manner of genealogies? And there were wars between Rehoboam and Jeroboam continually.
And Rehoboam slept with his fathers, and was buried in the city of David. And Abijah his son reigned in his stead.

In the eighteenth year of king Jeroboam, Abijah began to reign over Judah.
He reigned three years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Micaiah the daughter of Uriel of Gibeah. And there was war between Abijah and Jeroboam.
And Abijah joined battle with an army of valiant men of war, even four hundred thousand chosen men. And Jeroboam set the battle in array against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men who were mighty men of valor.
And Abijah stood up upon mount Zemaraim, which is in the hill-country of Ephraim, and said, Hear me, O Jeroboam and all Israel.
Should ye not know that Jehovah, the God of Israel, gave the kingdom over Israel to David forever, even to him and to his sons by a covenant of salt?
Yet Jeroboam the son of Nebat, the servant of Solomon the son of David, rose up, and rebelled against his lord.
And there were gathered to him worthless men, base fellows, who strengthened themselves against Rehoboam the son of Solomon when Rehoboam was young and tender-hearted, and could not withstand them.
And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of Jehovah in the hand of the sons of David, and ye are a great multitude, and there are with you the golden calves which Jeroboam made you for gods.
Have ye not driven out the priests of Jehovah, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites, and made priests for you after the manner of the peoples of other lands? So that whoever comes to consecrate himself with a young bullock and seven rams, the same may be a priest of them that are no gods.
But as for us, Jehovah is our God, and we have not forsaken him. And we have priests ministering to Jehovah, the sons of Aaron, and the Levites in their work.
And they burn to Jehovah every morning and every evening burnt offerings and sweet incense. Also they set the showbread in order upon the pure table, and the lampstand of gold with the lamps of it to burn every evening. For we keep the charge of Jehovah our God, but ye have forsaken him.
And, behold, God is with us at our head, and his priests with the trumpets of alarm to sound an alarm against you. O sons of Israel, fight ye not against Jehovah, the God of your fathers. For ye shall not prosper.
But Jeroboam caused an ambushment to come around behind them, so they were before Judah, and the ambushment was behind them.
And when Judah looked back, behold, the battle was before and behind them. And they cried to Jehovah, and the priests sounded with the trumpets.
Then the men of Judah gave a shout. And as the men of Judah shouted, it came to pass, that God smote Jeroboam and all Israel before Abijah and Judah.
And the sons of Israel fled before Judah, and God delivered them into their hand.
And Abijah and his people killed them with a great slaughter. So there fell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen men.
Thus the sons of Israel were brought under at that time, and the sons of Judah prevailed, because they relied upon Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
And Abijah pursued after Jeroboam, and took cities from him, Bethel with the towns of it, and Jeshanah with the towns of it, and Ephron with the towns of it.
Neither did Jeroboam recover strength again in the days of Abijah. And Jehovah smote him, and he died.
But Abijah grew mighty, and took to himself fourteen wives, and begot twenty-two sons, and sixteen daughters.
And the rest of the acts of Abijah, and his ways, and his sayings, are written in the commentary of the prophet Iddo.

So Abijah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David. And Asa his son reigned in his stead. In his days the land was quiet ten years.
And Asa did that which was good and right in the eyes of Jehovah his God.
For he took away the foreign altars, and the high places, and broke down the pillars, and hewed down the Asherim,
and commanded Judah to seek Jehovah, the God of their fathers, and to do the law and the commandment.
Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the sun-images. And the kingdom was quiet before him.
And he built fortified cities in Judah. For the land was quiet, and he had no war in those years, because Jehovah had given him rest.
For he said to Judah, Let us build these cities, and make about them walls, and towers, gates, and bars. The land is yet before us, because we have sought Jehovah our God. We have sought him, and he has given us rest on every side. So they built and prospered.
And Asa had an army that bore bucklers and spears, out of Judah three hundred thousand, and out of Benjamin, that bore shields and drew bows, two hundred and eighty thousand. All these were mighty men of valor.
And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian with an army of a million, and three hundred chariots. And he came to Mareshah.
Then Asa went out to meet him, and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah.
And Asa cried to Jehovah his God, and said, Jehovah, there is none besides thee to help, between the mighty and him who has no strength. Help us, O Jehovah our God. For we rely on thee, and in thy name we come against this multitude. O Jehovah, thou are our God. Let not man prevail against thee.
So Jehovah smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah. And the Ethiopians fled.
And Asa and the people who were with him pursued them to Gerar. And there fell of the Ethiopians so many that they could not recover themselves. For they were destroyed before Jehovah, and before his army. And they carried away very much booty.
And they smote all the cities round about Gerar. For the fear of Jehovah came upon them. And they despoiled all the cities. For there was much spoil in them.
They also smote the tents of cattle, and carried away sheep in abundance, and camels, and returned to Jerusalem.

And the Spirit of God came upon Azariah the son of Oded.
And he went out to meet Asa, and said to him, Hear ye me, Asa, and all Judah and Benjamin. Jehovah is with you while ye are with him. And if ye seek him, he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.
Now for a long time Israel was without the true God, and without a teaching priest, and without law.
But when in their distress they turned to Jehovah, the God of Israel, and sought him, he was found by them.
And in those times there was no peace to him who went out, nor to him who came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the lands.
And they were broken in pieces, nation against nation, and city against city. For God vexed them with all adversity.
But be ye strong, and let not your hands be slack. For your work shall be rewarded.
And when Asa heard these words, and the prophecy of Oded the prophet, he took courage, and put away the abominations out of all the land of Judah and Benjamin, and out of the cities which he had taken from the hill-country of Ephraim. And he renewed the altar of Jehovah, that was before the porch of Jehovah.
And he gathered all Judah and Benjamin, and those who sojourned with them out of Ephraim and Manasseh, and out of Simeon, for they came to him out of Israel in abundance when they saw that Jehovah his God was with him.
So they gathered themselves together at Jerusalem in the third month, in the fifteenth year of the reign of Asa.
And they sacrificed to Jehovah in that day of the spoil which they had brought, seven hundred oxen and seven thousand sheep.
And they entered into the covenant to seek Jehovah, the God of their fathers, with all their heart and with all their soul.
And that whoever would not seek Jehovah, the God of Israel, should be put to death, whether small or great, whether man or woman.
And they swore to Jehovah with a loud voice, and with shouting, and with trumpets, and with cornets.
And all Judah rejoiced at the oath. For they had sworn with all their heart, and sought him with their whole desire, and he was found by them. And Jehovah gave them rest round about.
And also he removed Maacah, the mother of Asa the king, from being queen, because she had made an abominable image for an Asherah. And Asa cut down her image, and made dust of it, and burnt it at the brook Kidron.
But the high places were not taken away out of Israel. Nevertheless the heart of Asa was perfect all his days.
And he brought into the house of God the things that his father had dedicated, and that he himself had dedicated, silver, and gold, and vessels.
And there was no more war to the thirty-fifth year of the reign of Asa.

In the thirty-sixth year of the reign of Asa, Baasha king of Israel went up against Judah, and built Ramah, that he might not allow anyone to go out or come in to Asa king of Judah.
Then Asa brought out silver and gold out of the treasures of the house of Jehovah and of the king's house, and sent to Ben-hadad king of Syria, who dwelt at Damascus, saying,
There is a league between me and thee, as between my father and thy father. Behold, I have sent thee silver and gold. Go, break thy league with Baasha king of Israel that he may depart from me.
And Ben-hadad hearkened to king Asa, and sent the captains of his armies against the cities of Israel. And they smote Ijon, and Dan, and Abel-maim, and all the store-cities of Naphtali.
And it came to pass, when Baasha heard of it, that he left off building Ramah, and let his work cease.
Then Asa the king took all Judah, and they carried away the stones of Ramah, and the timber of it, with which Baasha had built. And he built Geba and Mizpah with it.
And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah, and said to him, Because thou have relied on the king of Syria, and have not relied on Jehovah thy God, therefore the army of the king of Syria has escaped out of thy hand.
Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubim a huge army, with chariots and horsemen exceedingly many? Yet, because thou relied on Jehovah, he delivered them into thy hand.
For the eyes of Jehovah run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show himself strong on behalf of those whose heart is perfect toward him. In this thou have done foolishly, for from henceforth thou shall have wars.
Then Asa was angry with the seer, and put him in the prison-house. For he was in a rage with him because of this thing. And Asa oppressed some of the people at the same time.
And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last, lo, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
And in the thirty-ninth year of his reign Asa was diseased in his feet. His disease was exceedingly great, yet in his disease he did not seek for Jehovah, but to the physicians.
And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the forty-first year of his reign.
And they buried him in his own sepulchers, which he had hewn out for himself in the city of David, and laid him in the bed which was filled with sweet odors and various kinds of spices prepared by the perfumers' art. And they made a very great burning for him.

And Jehoshaphat his son reigned in his stead, and strengthened himself against Israel.
And he placed forces in all the fortified cities of Judah, and set garrisons in the land of Judah, and in the cities of Ephraim, which Asa his father had taken.
And Jehovah was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the former ways of his father David, and did not seek for the Baalim,
but sought for the God of his father, and walked in his commandments, and not after the doings of Israel.
Therefore Jehovah established the kingdom in his hand. And all Judah brought to Jehoshaphat tribute, and he had riches and honor in abundance.
And his heart was lifted up in the ways of Jehovah. And furthermore he took away the high places and the Asherim out of Judah.
Also in the third year of his reign he sent his rulers, even Ben-hail, and Obadiah, and Zechariah, and Nethanel, and Micaiah, to teach in the cities of Judah;
and with them the Levites, even Shemaiah, and Nethaniah, and Zebadiah, and Asahel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehonathan, and Adonijah, and Tobijah, and Tob-adonijah, the Levites; and with them Elishama and Jehoram, the priests.
And they taught in Judah, having the book of the law of Jehovah with them. And they went about throughout all the cities of Judah, and taught among the people.
And the fear of Jehovah fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands that were round about Judah, so that they made no war against Jehoshaphat.
And some of the Philistines brought Jehoshaphat presents, and silver for tribute. The Arabians also brought him flocks, seven thousand and seven hundred rams, and seven thousand and seven hundred he-goats.
And Jehoshaphat grew exceedingly great. And he built in Judah castles and cities of storage.
And he had many works in the cities of Judah, and men of war, mighty men of valor, in Jerusalem.
Adnah the captain, and with him three hundred thousand mighty men of valor;
and next to him Jehohanan the captain, and with him two hundred and eighty thousand;
and next to him Amasiah the son of Zichri, who willingly offered himself to Jehovah, and with him two hundred thousand mighty men of valor.
Eliada a mighty man of valor, and with him two hundred thousand armed with bow and shield;
and next to him Jehozabad, and with him a hundred and eighty thousand ready prepared for war.
These were those who waited on the king, besides those whom the king put in the fortified cities throughout all Judah.

Now Jehoshaphat had riches and honor in abundance. And he joined affinity with Ahab.
And after certain years he went down to Ahab to Samaria. And Ahab killed sheep and oxen for him in abundance, and for the people who were with him, and moved him to go up with him to Ramoth-gilead.
And Ahab king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat king of Judah, Will thou go with me to Ramoth-gilead? And he answered him, I am as thou are, and my people as thy people, and will be with thee in the war.
And Jehoshaphat said to the king of Israel, Inquire first, I pray thee, for the word of Jehovah.
Then the king of Israel gathered the prophets together, four hundred men, and said to them, Shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And they said, Go up. For God will deliver it into the hand of the king.
But Jehoshaphat said, Is there not here a prophet of Jehovah besides, that we may inquire of him?
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, There is yet one man by whom we may inquire of Jehovah, but I hate him. For he never prophesies good concerning me, but always evil; the same is Micaiah the son of Imla. And Jehoshaphat said, Let not the king say so.
Then the king of Israel called an officer, and said, Fetch quickly Micaiah the son of Imla.
Now the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah each sat on his throne, arrayed in their robes. And they were sitting in an open place at the entrance of the gate of Samaria, and all the prophets were prophesying before them.
And Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah made for him horns of iron, and said, Thus says Jehovah, With these thou shall push the Syrians until they be consumed.
And all the prophets prophesied so, saying, Go up to Ramoth-gilead, and prosper. For Jehovah will deliver it into the hand of the king.
And the messenger who went to call Micaiah spoke to him, saying, Behold, the words of the prophets are good to the king with one mouth. Let thy word therefore, I pray thee, be like one of theirs, and speak thou good.
And Micaiah said, As Jehovah lives, what my God says, that will I speak.
And when he came to the king, the king said to him, Micaiah, shall we go to Ramoth-gilead to battle, or shall I forbear? And he said, Go ye up, and prosper, and they shall be delivered into your hand.
And the king said to him, How many times shall I adjure thee that thou speak to me nothing but the truth in the name of Jehovah?
And he said, I saw all Israel scattered upon the mountains, as sheep that have no shepherd. And Jehovah said, These have no master. Let them return every man to his house in peace.
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, Did I not tell thee that he would not prophesy good concerning me, but evil?
And Micaiah said, Therefore hear ye the word of Jehovah. I saw Jehovah sitting upon his throne, and all the host of heaven standing at his right hand and at his left.
And Jehovah said, Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel, that he may go up and fall at Ramoth-gilead? And one spoke saying after this manner, and another saying after that manner.
And there came forth a spirit, and stood before Jehovah, and said, I will entice him. And Jehovah said to him, With what?
And he said, I will go forth, and will be a lying spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. And he said, Thou shall entice him, and shall also prevail. Go forth, and do so.
Now therefore, behold, Jehovah has put a lying spirit in the mouth of these thy prophets. And Jehovah has spoken evil concerning thee.
Then Zedekiah the son of Chenaanah came near, and smote Micaiah upon the cheek, and said, Which way did the Spirit of Jehovah go from me to speak to thee?
And Micaiah said, Behold, thou shall see on that day when thou shall go into an inner chamber to hide thyself.
And the king of Israel said, Take ye Micaiah, and carry him back to Amon the governor of the city, and to Joash the king's son,
and say, Thus says the king, Put this fellow in the prison, and feed him with bread of affliction and with water of affliction, until I return in peace.
And Micaiah said, If thou return at all in peace, Jehovah has not spoken by me. And he said, Hear, ye peoples, all of you.
So the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat the king of Judah went up to Ramoth-gilead.
And the king of Israel said to Jehoshaphat, I will disguise myself, and go into the battle, but put thou on thy robes. So the king of Israel disguised himself, and they went into the battle.
Now the king of Syria had commanded the captains of his chariots, saying, Fight neither with small nor great, except only with the king of Israel.
And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw Jehoshaphat, that they said, It is the king of Israel. Therefore they turned around to fight against him. But Jehoshaphat cried out. And Jehovah helped him, and God moved them from him.
And it came to pass, when the captains of the chariots saw that it was not the king of Israel, that they turned back from pursuing him.
And a certain man drew his bow at a venture, and smote the king of Israel between the joints of the armor. Therefore he said to the driver of the chariot, Turn thy hand, and carry me out of the army. For I am severely wounded.
And the battle increased that day. However the king of Israel propped himself up in his chariot against the Syrians until the evening. And about the time of the going down of the sun he died.

And Jehoshaphat the king of Judah returned to his house in peace to Jerusalem.
And Jehu the son of Hanani the seer went out to meet him, and said to king Jehoshaphat, Should thou help the wicked, and love those who hate Jehovah? For this thing wrath is upon thee from before Jehovah.
Nevertheless there are good things found in thee, in that thou have put away the Asheroth out of the land, and have set thy heart to seek God.
And Jehoshaphat dwelt at Jerusalem. And he went out again among the people from Beersheba to the hill-country of Ephraim, and brought them back to Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
And he set judges in the land throughout all the fortified cities of Judah, city by city,
and said to the judges, Consider what ye do. For ye judge not for man, but for Jehovah, and he is with you in the judgment.
Now therefore let the fear of Jehovah be upon you. Take heed and do it. For there is no iniquity with Jehovah our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking of bribes.
Moreover in Jerusalem Jehoshaphat set from the Levites and the priests, and from the heads of the fathers of Israel for the judgment of Jehovah, and for controversies. And they returned to Jerusalem.
And he charged them, saying, Thus ye shall do in the fear of Jehovah, faithfully, and with a perfect heart.
And whenever any controversy shall come to you from your brothers who dwell in their cities, between blood and blood, between law and commandment, statutes and ordinances, ye shall warn them, that they not be guilty towards Jehovah, and so wrath come upon you and upon your brothers. Do this, and ye shall not be guilty.
And, behold, Amariah the chief priest is over you in all matters of Jehovah, and Zebadiah the son of Ishmael, the ruler of the house of Judah, in all the king's matters. The Levites shall also be officers before you. Deal courageously, and Jehovah be with the good.

And it came to pass after this, that the sons of Moab, and the sons of Ammon, and with them some of the Minaeans, came against Jehoshaphat to battle.
Then there came some who told Jehoshaphat, saying, There comes a great multitude against thee from beyond the sea from Syria. And, behold, they are in Hazazon-tamar (the same is En-gedi).
And Jehoshaphat was afraid, and set himself to seek for Jehovah. And he proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah.
And Judah gathered themselves together, to seek help from Jehovah, even out of all the cities of Judah they came to seek Jehovah.
And Jehoshaphat stood in the assembly of Judah and Jerusalem in the house of Jehovah before the new court.
And he said, O Jehovah, the God of our fathers, are thou not God in heaven? And are thou not ruler over all the kingdoms of the nations? And in thy hand is power and might, so that none is able to withstand thee.
Did thou not, O our God, drive out the inhabitants of this land before thy people Israel, and give it to the seed of Abraham thy friend forever?
And they dwelt therein, and have built for thee a sanctuary in it for thy name, saying,
If evil comes upon us, the sword, judgment, or pestilence, or famine, we will stand before this house, and before thee, (for thy name is in this house,) and cry out to thee in our affliction, and thou will hear and save.
And now, behold, the sons of Ammon and Moab and mount Seir (whom thou would not let Israel invade when they came out of the land of Egypt, but they turned aside from them, and did not destroy them),
behold, how they reward us, to come to cast us out of thy possession, which thou have given us to inherit.
O our God, will thou not judge them? For we have no might against this great company that comes against us. Neither do we know what to do, but our eyes are upon thee.
And all Judah stood before Jehovah, with their little ones, their wives, and their sons.
Then upon Jahaziel the son of Zechariah, the son of Benaiah, the son of Jeiel, the son of Mattaniah, the Levite, of the sons of Asaph, came the Spirit of Jehovah in the midst of the assembly.
And he said, Hearken ye, all Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem, and thou king Jehoshaphat. Thus says Jehovah to you, Fear ye not, neither be dismayed because of this great multitude. For the battle is not yours, but God's.
Tomorrow go ye down against them. Behold, they come up by the ascent of Ziz. And ye shall find them at the end of the valley, before the wilderness of Jeruel.
Ye shall not need to fight in this battle. Set yourselves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of Jehovah with you, O Judah and Jerusalem. Fear not, nor be dismayed. Tomorrow go out against them, for Jehovah is with you.
And Jehoshaphat bowed his head with his face to the ground. And all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem fell down before Jehovah, worshiping Jehovah.
And the Levites, of the sons of the Kohathites and of the sons of the Korahites, stood up to praise Jehovah, the God of Israel, with an exceedingly loud voice.
And they rose early in the morning, and went forth into the wilderness of Tekoa. And as they went forth, Jehoshaphat stood and said, Hear me, O Judah, and ye inhabitants of Jerusalem. Believe in Jehovah your God, so shall ye be established. Believe his prophets, so shall ye prosper.
And when he had taken counsel with the people, he appointed those who should sing to Jehovah, and give praise in holy array, as they went out before the army, and say, Give thanks to Jehovah. For his loving kindness is forever.
And when they began to sing and to praise, Jehovah set an ambushment against the sons of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir who came against Judah, and they were smitten.
For the sons of Ammon and Moab stood up against the inhabitants of mount Seir, to slay and destroy them utterly. And when they had made an end of the inhabitants of Seir, every one helped to destroy another of themselves.
And when Judah came to the watch-tower of the wilderness, they looked upon the multitude. And, behold, they were dead bodies fallen to the earth, and there were none who escaped.
And when Jehoshaphat and his people came to take the spoil of them, they found among them in abundance both riches and dead bodies, and precious jewels, which they stripped off for themselves, more than they could carry away. And they were three days in taking the spoil, it was so much.
And on the fourth day they assembled themselves in the valley of Beracah, for there they blessed Jehovah. Therefore the name of that place was called The valley of Beracah to this day.
Then they returned, every man of Judah and Jerusalem, and Jehoshaphat in the forefront of them, to go again to Jerusalem with joy. For Jehovah had made them to rejoice over their enemies.
And they came to Jerusalem with psalteries and harps and trumpets to the house of Jehovah.
And the fear of God was on all the kingdoms of the countries, when they heard that Jehovah fought against the enemies of Israel.
So the realm of Jehoshaphat was quiet. For his God gave him rest round about.
And Jehoshaphat reigned over Judah. He was thirty-five years old when he began to reign. And he reigned twenty-five years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Azubah the daughter of Shilhi.
And he walked in the way of Asa his father, and did not turn aside from it, doing that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah.
However the high places were not taken away. Neither as yet had the people set their hearts to the God of their fathers.
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold, they are written in the history of Jehu the son of Hanani, which is inserted in the book of the kings of Israel.
And after this Jehoshaphat king of Judah joined himself with Ahaziah king of Israel. The same did very wickedly.
And he joined himself with him to make ships to go to Tarshish. And they made the ships in Ezion-geber.
Then Eliezer the son of Dodavahu of Mareshah prophesied against Jehoshaphat, saying, Because thou have joined thyself with Ahaziah, Jehovah has destroyed thy works. And the ships were broken, so that they were not able to go to Tarshish.

And Jehoshaphat slept with his fathers, and was buried with his fathers in the city of David. And Jehoram his son reigned in his stead.
Azariah, and Jehiel, and Zechariah, and Azariah, and Michael, and Shephatiah. All these were the sons of Jehoshaphat king of Israel.
And their father gave them great gifts, of silver, and of gold, and of precious things, with fortified cities in Judah. But the kingdom he gave to Jehoram, because he was the firstborn.
Now when Jehoram was risen up over the kingdom of his father, and had strengthened himself, he killed all his brothers with the sword, and also various of the rulers of Israel.
Jehoram was thirty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eight years in Jerusalem.
And he walked in the way of the kings of Israel, as did the house of Ahab, for he had the daughter of Ahab to wife. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
However Jehovah would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that he had made with David, and as he promised to give a lamp to him and to his sons always.
In his days Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah, and made a king over themselves.
Then Jehoram passed over with his captains, and all his chariots with him. And he rose up by night, and smote the Edomites that encompassed him around, and the captains of the chariots.
So Edom revolted from under the hand of Judah to this day. Then Libnah revolted at the same time from under his hand because he had forsaken Jehovah, the God of his fathers.
Moreover he made high places in the mountains of Judah, and made the inhabitants of Jerusalem to play the harlot, and led Judah astray.
And there came a writing to him from Elijah the prophet, saying, Thus says Jehovah, the God of David thy father, Because thou have not walked in the ways of Jehoshaphat thy father, nor in the ways of Asa king of Judah,
but have walked in the way of the kings of Israel, and have made Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem to play the harlot, like the house of Ahab did, and also have slain thy brothers of thy father's house who were better than thyself,
behold, Jehovah will smite thy people with a great plague, and thy sons, and thy wives, and all thy substance.
And thou shall have great sickness by disease of thy bowels until thy bowels fall out by reason of the sickness, day by day.
And Jehovah stirred up against Jehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and of the Arabians who are beside the Ethiopians.
And they came up against Judah, and broke into it, and carried away all the substance that was found in the king's house, and his sons also, and his wives, so that there has not been left a son to him, except Jehoahaz, the youngest of his sons.
And after all this Jehovah smote him in his bowels with an incurable disease.
And it came to pass, in process of time, at the end of two years, that his bowels fell out because of his sickness, and he died of severe diseases. And his people made no burning for him like the burning of his fathers.
He was thirty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned in Jerusalem eight years. And he departed without being wanted. And they buried him in the city of David, but not in the sepulchers of the kings.

And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in his stead, for the band of men who came with the Arabians to the camp had slain all the eldest. So Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned.
Ahaziah was twenty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned one year in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Athaliah the daughter of Omri.
He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab. For his mother was his counselor to do wickedly.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, as did the house of Ahab. For they were his counselors after the death of his father, to his destruction.
He walked also after their counsel, and went with Jehoram the son of Ahab king of Israel to war against Hazael king of Syria at Ramoth-gilead. And the Syrians wounded Joram.
And he returned to be healed in Jezreel of the wounds which they had given him at Ramah when he fought against Hazael king of Syria. And Azariah the son of Jehoram king of Judah went down to see Jehoram the son of Ahab in Jezreel because he was sick.
Now the destruction of Ahaziah was of God, in that he went to Joram, for when he came he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of Nimshi, whom Jehovah had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab.
And it came to pass, when Jehu was executing judgment upon the house of Ahab, that he found the rulers of Judah, and the sons of the brothers of Ahaziah, ministering to Ahaziah, and killed them.
And he sought Ahaziah, and they caught him (now he was hiding in Samaria). And they brought him to Jehu, and killed him. And they buried him, for they said, He is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought Jehovah with all his heart. And the house of Ahaziah had no power to hold the kingdom.
Now when Athaliah the mother of Ahaziah saw that her son was dead, she arose and destroyed all the royal seed of the house of Judah.
But Jehoshabeath, the daughter of the king, took Joash the son of Ahaziah, and stole him away from among the king's sons who were slain, and put him and his nurse in the bedchamber. So Jehoshabeath, the daughter of king Jehoram, the wife of Jehoiada the priest (for she was the sister of Ahaziah), hid him from Athaliah, so that she did not kill him.
And he was with them hid in the house of God six years, and Athaliah reigned over the land.

And in the seventh year Jehoiada strengthened himself, and took the captains of hundreds, Azariah the son of Jeroham, and Ishmael the son of Jehohanan, and Azariah the son of Obed, and Maaseiah the son of Adaiah, and Elishaphat the son of Zichri, into covenant with him.
And they went about in Judah, and gathered the Levites out of all the cities of Judah, and the heads of fathers of Israel, and they came to Jerusalem.
And all the assembly made a covenant with the king in the house of God. And he said to them, Behold, the king's son shall reign, as Jehovah has spoken concerning the sons of David.
A third part of you who come in on the sabbath, of the priests and of the Levites, shall be porters of the thresholds,
and a third part shall be at the king's house, and a third part at the gate of the foundation. And all the people shall be in the courts of the house of Jehovah.
But let none come into the house of Jehovah except the priests, and those who minister of the Levites. They shall come in for they are holy, but all the people shall keep the charge of Jehovah.
And the Levites shall encompass the king round about, every man with his weapons in his hand. And whoever comes into the house, let him be slain. And be ye with the king when he comes in, and when he goes out.
So the Levites and all Judah did according to all that Jehoiada the priest commanded. And they took every man his men, those who were to come in on the sabbath, with those who were to go out on the sabbath. For Jehoiada the priest did not dismiss the divisions.
And Jehoiada the priest delivered to the captains of hundreds the spears, and bucklers, and shields, that had been king David's, which were in the house of God.
And he set all the people, every man with his weapon in his hand, from the right side of the house to the left side of the house, along by the altar and the house, by the king round about.
Then they brought out the king's son, and put the crown upon him, and gave him the testimony, and made him king. And Jehoiada and his sons anointed him. And they said, Live, O king.
And when Athaliah heard the noise of the people running and praising the king, she came to the people into the house of Jehovah.
And she looked, and, behold, the king stood by his pillar at the entrance, and the captains and the trumpets by the king. And all the people of the land rejoiced, and blew trumpets. The singers also played on instruments of music, and led the singing of praise. Then Athaliah tore her clothes, and said, Treason! treason!
And Jehoiada the priest brought out the captains of hundreds who were set over the army, and said to them, Have her forth between the ranks. And whoever follows her, let him be slain with the sword, for the priest said, Do not slay her in the house of Jehovah.
So they made way for her. And she went to the entrance of the horse gate to the king's house, and they killed her there.
And Jehoiada made a covenant between himself, and all the people, and the king, that they should be Jehovah's people.
And all the people went to the house of Baal, and broke it down, and broke his altars and his images in pieces, and killed Mattan the priest of Baal before the altars.
And Jehoiada appointed the officers of the house of Jehovah under the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in the house of Jehovah, to offer the burnt offerings of Jehovah, as it is written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, according to the order of David.
And he set the porters at the gates of the house of Jehovah that no man who was unclean in anything should enter in.
And he took the captains of hundreds, and the mighty men, and the governors of the people, and all the people of the land, and brought down the king from the house of Jehovah. And they came through the upper gate to the king's house, and set the king upon the throne of the kingdom.
So all the people of the land rejoiced, and the city was quiet. And they had slain Athaliah with the sword.

Joash was seven years old when he began to reign, and he reigned forty years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Zibiah, of Beersheba.
And Joash did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah all the days of Jehoiada the priest.
And Jehoiada took two wives for him, and he begot sons and daughters.
And it came to pass after this, that Joash was minded to restore the house of Jehovah.
And he gathered together the priests and the Levites, and said to them, Go out to the cities of Judah, and gather money from all Israel to repair the house of your God from year to year. And see that ye hasten the matter. However the Levites did not hasten it.
And the king called for Jehoiada the chief, and said to him, Why have thou not required of the Levites to bring in out of Judah and out of Jerusalem the tax of Moses the servant of Jehovah, and of the assembly of Israel, for the tent of the testimony?
For the sons of Athaliah, that wicked woman, had broken up the house of God, and also all the dedicated things of the house of Jehovah they bestowed upon the Baalim.
So the king commanded, and they made a chest, and set it outside at the gate of the house of Jehovah.
And they made a proclamation through Judah and Jerusalem, to bring in for Jehovah the tax that Moses the servant of God laid upon Israel in the wilderness.
And all the rulers and all the people rejoiced, and brought in, and cast into the chest, until they had made an end.
And it was so, that, at what ever time the chest was brought to the king's officers by the hand of the Levites, and when they saw that there was much money, the king's scribe and the chief priest's officer came and emptied the chest, and took it, and carried it to its place again. Thus they did day by day, and gathered money in abundance.
And the king and Jehoiada gave it to such as did the work of the service of the house of Jehovah. And they hired masons and carpenters to restore the house of Jehovah, and also such as wrought iron and brass to repair the house of Jehovah.
So the workmen labored, and the work of repairing went forward in their hands, and they set up the house of God in its state, and strengthened it.
And when they had made an end, they brought the rest of the money before the king and Jehoiada, from which were made vessels for the house of Jehovah, even vessels with which to minister and to offer, and spoons, and vessels of gold and silver. And they offered burnt offerings in the house of Jehovah continually all the days of Jehoiada.
But Jehoiada grew old and was full of days, and he died. He was a hundred and thirty years old when he died.
And they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, and toward God and his house.
Now after the death of Jehoiada the rulers of Judah came, and made obeisance to the king. Then the king hearkened to them.
And they forsook the house of Jehovah, the God of their fathers, and served the Asherim and the idols. And wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for this their guiltiness.
Yet he sent prophets to them to bring them again to Jehovah. And they testified against them, but they would not give ear.
And the Spirit of God came upon Zechariah the son of Jehoiada the priest. And he stood above the people, and said to them, Thus says God, Why do ye transgress the commandments of Jehovah, so that ye cannot prosper? Because ye have forsaken Jehovah, he has also forsaken you.
And they conspired against him, and stoned him with stones at the commandment of the king in the court of the house of Jehovah.
Thus Joash the king did not remember the kindness which Jehoiada his father had done to him, but killed his son. And when he died, he said, Jehovah look upon it, and require it.
And it came to pass at the end of the year, that the army of the Syrians came up against him. And they came to Judah and Jerusalem, and destroyed all the rulers of the people from among the people, and sent all the spoil of them to the king of Damascus.
For the army of the Syrians came with a small company of men. And Jehovah delivered a very great host into their hand because they had forsaken Jehovah, the God of their fathers. So they executed judgment upon Joash.
And when they were departed from him (for they left him very sick), his own servants conspired against him for the blood of the sons of Jehoiada the priest, and killed him on his bed, and he died. And they buried him in the city of David, but they did not bury him in the sepulchers of the kings.
Zabad the son of Shimeath the Ammonitess, and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith the Moabitess.
Now concerning his sons, and the greatness of the burdens laid upon him, and the rebuilding of the house of God, behold, they are written in the commentary of the book of the kings. And Amaziah his son reigned in his stead.

Amaziah was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jehoaddan, of Jerusalem.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, but not with a perfect heart.
Now it came to pass, when the kingdom was established to him, that he killed his servants who had killed the king his father.
But he did not put their sons to death, but did according to that which is written in the law in the book of Moses, as Jehovah commanded, saying, The fathers shall not die for the sons, neither shall the sons die for the fathers, but every man shall die for his own sin.
Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together, and appointed them according to their fathers' houses, for heads of thousands and heads of hundreds, even all Judah and Benjamin. And he numbered them from twenty years old and upward, and found them three hundred thousand chosen men, able to go forth to war, who could handle spear and shield.
He also hired a hundred thousand mighty men of valor out of Israel for a hundred talents of silver.
But there came a man of God to him, saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee. For Jehovah is not with Israel, namely, with all the sons of Ephraim.
But if thou are going, do it. Be strong for the battle, because God will cast thee down before the enemy, for God has power to help, and to cast down.
And Amaziah said to the man of God, But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel? And the man of God answered, Jehovah is able to give thee much more than this.
Then Amaziah separated them, namely, the army that came to him out of Ephraim, to go home again. Therefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they returned home in fierce anger.
And Amaziah took courage, and led forth his people, and went to the Valley of Salt, and smote ten thousand of the sons of Seir.
And the sons of Judah carried away ten thousand alive, and brought them to the top of the rock, and cast them down from the top of the rock, so that they all were broken in pieces.
But the men of the army whom Amaziah sent back, that they should not go with him to battle, fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even to Beth-horon, and smote three thousand of them, and took much spoil.
Now it came to pass, after Amaziah came from the slaughter of the Edomites, that he brought the gods of the sons of Seir, and set them up to be his gods, and bowed down himself before them, and burned incense to them.
Therefore the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Amaziah. And he sent a prophet to him, who said to him, Why have thou sought after the gods of the people, which have not delivered their own people out of thy hand?
And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that the king said to him, Have we made thee of the king's counsel? Cease. Why should thou be smitten? Then the prophet ceased, and said, I know that God has determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not hearkened to my counsel.
Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice, and sent to Joash, the son of Jehoahaz the son of Jehu, king of Israel, saying, Come, let us look each other in the face.
And Joash king of Israel sent to Amaziah king of Judah, saying, The thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in Lebanon, saying, Give thy daughter to my son to wife. And there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trampled down the thistle.
Thou say, Lo, I have smitten Edom. And thy heart lifts thee up to boast. Remain now at home. Why should thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou should fall, even thou, and Judah with thee?
But Amaziah would not hear, for it was of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their enemies, because they had sought after the gods of Edom.
So Joash king of Israel went up. And he and Amaziah king of Judah looked each other in the face at Beth-shemesh, which belongs to Judah.
And Judah was put to the worse before Israel, and they fled every man to his tent.
And Joash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of Joash the son of Jehoahaz, at Beth-shemesh, and brought him to Jerusalem, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, four hundred cubits.
And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found in the house of God with Obed-edom, and the treasures of the king's house, also the hostages, and returned to Samaria.
And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived fifteen years after the death of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel.
Now the rest of the acts of Amaziah, first and last, behold, are they not written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel?
Now from the time that Amaziah turned away from following Jehovah they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish. But they sent after him to Lachish, and killed him there.
And they brought him upon horses, and buried him with his fathers in the city of Judah.

And all the people of Judah took Uzziah, who was sixteen years old, and made him king in the place of his father Amaziah.
He built Eloth, and restored it to Judah, after that the king slept with his fathers.
Uzziah was sixteen years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-two years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jechiliah, of Jerusalem.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his father Amaziah had done.
And he set himself to seek God in the days of Zechariah, who had understanding in the vision of God. And as long as he sought Jehovah, God made him to prosper.
And he went forth and warred against the Philistines, and broke down the wall of Gath, and the wall of Jabneh, and the wall of Ashdod. And he built cities in the country of Ashdod, and among the Philistines.
And God helped him against the Philistines, and against the Arabians who dwelt in Gur-baal, and the Meunim.
And the Ammonites gave tribute to Uzziah. And his name spread abroad even to the entrance of Egypt, for he grew exceedingly strong.
Moreover Uzziah built towers in Jerusalem at the corner gate, and at the valley gate, and at the turning of the wall, and fortified them.
And he built towers in the wilderness, and hewed out many cisterns, for he had much cattle, also in the lowland and in the plain. And he had husbandmen and vinedressers in the mountains and in the fruitful fields, for he loved husbandry.
Moreover Uzziah had an army of fighting men who went out to war by bands, according to the number of their reckoning made by Jeiel the scribe and Maaseiah the officer, under the hand of Hananiah, one of the king's captains.
The whole number of the heads of fathers, even the mighty men of valor, was two thousand and six hundred.
And under their hand was an army, three hundred seven thousand and five hundred, that made war with mighty power, to help the king against the enemy.
And Uzziah prepared for them, even for all the army, shields, and spears, and helmets, and coats of mail, and bows, and stones for slinging.
And he made engines in Jerusalem, invented by skilful men, to be on the towers and upon the battlements, with which to shoot arrows and great stones. And his name spread far abroad. For he was marvelously helped, till he was strong.
But when he was strong, his heart was lifted up, so that he did corruptly, and he trespassed against Jehovah his God. For he went into the temple of Jehovah to burn incense upon the altar of incense.
And Azariah the priest went in after him, and with him eighty priests of Jehovah, who were valiant men.
And they withstood Uzziah the king, and said to him, It does not pertain to thee, Uzziah, to burn incense to Jehovah, but to the priests the sons of Aaron who are consecrated to burn incense. Go out of the sanctuary. For thou have trespassed, neither shall it be for thine honor from Jehovah God.
Then Uzziah was angry. And he had a censer in his hand to burn incense. And while he was angry with the priests, the leprosy broke forth in his forehead before the priests in the house of Jehovah, beside the altar of incense.
And Azariah the chief priest, and all the priests, looked upon him, and, behold, he was leprous in his forehead. And they thrust him out quickly from there. Yea, he himself also hastened to go out, because Jehovah had smitten him.
And Uzziah the king was a leper to the day of his death, and dwelt in a separate house, being a leper. For he was cut off from the house of Jehovah, and Jotham his son was over the king's house, judging the people of the land.
Now the rest of the acts of Uzziah, first and last, Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, wrote.
So Uzziah slept with his fathers, and they buried him with his fathers in the field of burial which belonged to the kings. For they said, He is a leper. And Jotham his son reigned in his stead.

Jotham was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Jerushah the daughter of Zadok.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that his father Uzziah had done. However he did not enter into the temple of Jehovah. And the people still did corruptly.
He built the upper gate of the house of Jehovah, and on the wall of Ophel he built much.
Moreover he built cities in the hill-country of Judah, and in the forests he built castles and towers.
Also he fought with the king of the sons of Ammon, and prevailed against them. And the sons of Ammon gave him the same year a hundred talents of silver, and ten thousand measures of wheat, and ten thousand of barley. So much did the sons of Ammon render to him, in the second year also, and in the third.
So Jotham became mighty, because he ordered his ways before Jehovah his God.
Now the rest of the acts of Jotham, and all his wars, and his ways, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.
He was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem.
And Jotham slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city of David. And Ahaz his son reigned in his stead.

Ahaz was twenty years old when he began to reign, and he reigned sixteen years in Jerusalem. And he did not do that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah like David his father,
but he walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and also made molten images for the Baalim.
Moreover he burnt incense in the valley of the son of Hinnom, and burnt his sons in the fire, according to the abominations of the nations whom Jehovah cast out before the sons of Israel.
And he sacrificed and burnt incense in the high places, and on the hills, and under every green tree.
Therefore Jehovah his God delivered him into the hand of the king of Syria. And they smote him, and carried away of his a great multitude of captives, and brought them to Damascus. And he was also delivered into the hand of the king of Israel, who smote him with a great slaughter.
For Pekah the son of Remaliah killed in Judah a hundred and twenty thousand in one day, all of them valiant men, because they had forsaken Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
And Zichri, a mighty man of Ephraim, killed Maaseiah the king's son, and Azrikam the ruler of the house, and Elkanah who was next to the king.
And the sons of Israel carried away captive of their brothers two hundred thousand, women, sons, and daughters, and also took away much spoil from them, and brought the spoil to Samaria.
But a prophet of Jehovah was there, whose name was Oded. And he went out to meet the army that came to Samaria, and said to them, Behold, because Jehovah, the God of your fathers, was angry with Judah, he has delivered them into your hand. And ye have slain them in a rage which has reached up to heaven.
And now ye propose to keep under the sons of Judah and Jerusalem for bondmen and bondwomen to you. Are there not even with you trespasses of your own against Jehovah your God?
Now hear me therefore, and send back the captives that ye have taken captive of your brothers. For the fierce wrath of Jehovah is upon you.
Then certain of the heads of the sons of Ephraim, Azariah the son of Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, and Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against those who came from the war,
and said to them, Ye shall not bring in the captives here. For ye propose that which will bring upon us a trespass against Jehovah, to add to our sins and to our trespass. For our trespass is great, and there is fierce wrath against Israel.
So the armed men left the captives and the spoil before the rulers and all the assembly.
And the men who have been mentioned by name rose up, and took the captives, and with the spoil clothed all who were naked among them, and dressed them, and shod them, and gave them to eat and to drink, and anointed them, and carried all the feeble of them upon donkeys, and brought them to Jericho, the city of palm trees, to their brothers. Then they returned to Samaria.
At that time king Ahaz sent to the kings of Assyria to help him.
For again the Edomites had come and smitten Judah, and carried away captives.
The Philistines also had invaded the cities of the lowland, and of the South of Judah, and had taken Beth-shemesh, and Aijalon, and Gederoth, and Soco with the towns of it, and Timnah with the towns of it, also Gimzo and the towns of it. And they dwelt there.
For Jehovah brought Judah low because of Ahaz king of Israel, for he had dealt wantonly in Judah, and trespassed severely against Jehovah.
And Tilgath-pilneser king of Assyria came to him, and distressed him, but did not strengthen him.
For Ahaz took away a portion out of the house of Jehovah, and out of the house of the king and of the rulers, and gave it to the king of Assyria, but it did not help him.
And in the time of his distress he trespassed yet more against Jehovah, this same king Ahaz.
For he sacrificed to the gods of Damascus, which smote him. And he said, Because the gods of the kings of Syria helped them, therefore I will sacrifice to them, that they may help me. But they were the ruin of him, and of all Israel.
And Ahaz gathered together the vessels of the house of God, and cut in pieces the vessels of the house of God, and shut up the doors of the house of Jehovah. And he made altars for him in every corner of Jerusalem.
And in every city of Judah he made high places to burn incense to other gods, and provoked to anger Jehovah, the God of his fathers.
Now the rest of his acts, and all his ways, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
And Ahaz slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the city, even in Jerusalem. For they did not bring him into the sepulchers of the kings of Israel. And Hezekiah his son reigned in his stead.

Hezekiah began to reign when he was twenty-five years old, and he reigned twenty-nine years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Abijah, the daughter of Zechariah.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, according to all that David his father had done.
In the first year of his reign, in the first month, he opened the doors of the house of Jehovah, and repaired them.
And he brought in the priests and the Levites, and gathered them together into the broad place on the east,
and said to them, Hear me, ye Levites. Now sanctify yourselves, and sanctify the house of Jehovah, the God of your fathers, and carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place.
For our fathers have trespassed, and done that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah our God, and have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of Jehovah, and turned their backs.
Also they have shut up the doors of the porch, and put out the lamps, and have not burned incense nor offered burnt offerings in the holy place to the God of Israel.
Therefore the wrath of Jehovah was upon Judah and Jerusalem, and he has delivered them to be tossed to and fro, to be an astonishment, and a hissing, as ye see with your eyes.
For, lo, our fathers have fallen by the sword, and our sons and our daughters and our wives are in captivity for this.
Now it is in my heart to make a covenant with Jehovah, the God of Israel, that his fierce anger may turn away from us.
My sons, be not now negligent. For Jehovah has chosen you to stand before him, to minister to him, and that ye should be his ministers, and burn incense.
Mahath, the son of Amasai, and Joel the son of Azariah, of the sons of the Kohathites, and of the sons of Merari, Kish the son of Abdi, and Azariah the son of Jehallelel, and of the Gershonites, Joah the son of Zimmah, and Eden the son of Joah;
and of the sons of Elizaphan, Shimri and Jeuel, and of the sons of Asaph, Zechariah and Mattaniah,
and of the sons of Heman, Jehuel and Shimei, and of the sons of Jeduthun, Shemaiah and Uzziel.
And they gathered their brothers, and sanctified themselves, and went in, according to the commandment of the king by the words of Jehovah, to cleanse the house of Jehovah.
And the priests went in to the inner part of the house of Jehovah to cleanse it, and brought out all the uncleanness that they found in the temple of Jehovah into the court of the house of Jehovah. And the Levites took it, to carry it out abroad to the brook Kidron.
Now they began on the first day of the first month to sanctify, and on the eighth day of the month they came to the porch of Jehovah. And they sanctified the house of Jehovah in eight days, and on the sixteenth day of the first month they made an end.
Then they went in to Hezekiah the king within the palace, and said, We have cleansed all the house of Jehovah, and the altar of burnt offering with all the vessels of it, and the table of showbread with all the vessels of it.
Moreover all the vessels, which king Ahaz in his reign cast away when he trespassed, we have prepared and sanctified. And, behold, they are before the altar of Jehovah.
Then Hezekiah the king arose early, and gathered the rulers of the city, and went up to the house of Jehovah.
And they brought seven bullocks, and seven rams, and seven lambs, and seven he-goats, for a sin offering for the kingdom and for the sanctuary and for Judah. And he commanded the priests the sons of Aaron to offer them on the altar of Jehovah.
So they killed the bullocks. And the priests received the blood, and sprinkled it on the altar. And they killed the rams, and sprinkled the blood upon the altar. They also killed the lambs, and sprinkled the blood upon the altar.
And they brought near the he-goats for the sin offering before the king and the assembly. And they laid their hands upon them,
and the priests killed them. And they made a sin offering with their blood upon the altar, to make atonement for all Israel. For the king commanded that the burnt offering and the sin offering should be made for all Israel.
And he set the Levites in the house of Jehovah with cymbals, with psalteries, and with harps, according to the commandment of David, and of Gad the king's seer, and Nathan the prophet. For the commandment was of Jehovah by his prophets.
And the Levites stood with the instruments of David, and the priests with the trumpets.
And Hezekiah commanded to offer the burnt offering upon the altar. And when the burnt offering began, the song of Jehovah began also, and the trumpets, together with the instruments of David king of Israel.
And all the assembly worshiped, and the singers sang, and the trumpeters sounded. All this until the burnt offering was finished.
And when they had made an end of offering, the king and all who were present with him bowed themselves and worshiped.
Moreover Hezekiah the king and the rulers commanded the Levites to sing praises to Jehovah with the words of David, and of Asaph the seer. And they sang praises with gladness, and they bowed their heads and worshiped.
Then Hezekiah answered and said, Now ye have consecrated yourselves to Jehovah. Come near and bring sacrifices and thank offerings into the house of Jehovah. And the assembly brought in sacrifices and thank offerings; and as many as were of a willing heart brought burnt offerings.
And the number of the burnt offerings which the assembly brought was seventy bullocks, a hundred rams, and two hundred lambs. All these were for a burnt offering to Jehovah.
And the consecrated things were six hundred oxen and three thousand sheep.
But the priests were too few, so that they could not skin all the burnt offerings. Therefore their brothers the Levites helped them till the work was ended, and until the priests had sanctified themselves. For the Levites were more upright in heart to sanctify themselves than the priests.
And also the burnt offerings were in abundance, with the fat of the peace offerings, and with the drink offerings for every burnt offering. So the service of the house of Jehovah was set in order.
And Hezekiah rejoiced, and all the people, because of that which God had prepared for the people; for the thing was done suddenly.

And Hezekiah sent to all Israel and Judah, and wrote letters also to Ephraim and Manasseh, that they should come to the house of Jehovah at Jerusalem, to keep the Passover to Jehovah, the God of Israel.
For the king had taken counsel, and his rulers, and all the assembly in Jerusalem, to keep the Passover in the second month.
For they could not keep it at that time, because the priests had not sanctified themselves in sufficient number, neither had the people gathered themselves together to Jerusalem.
And the thing was right in the eyes of the king and of all the assembly.
So they established a decree to make proclamation throughout all Israel, from Beersheba even to Dan, that they should come to keep the Passover to Jehovah, the God of Israel, at Jerusalem. For they had not kept it in great numbers in such sort as it is written.
So the posts went with the letters from the king and his rulers throughout all Israel and Judah, and according to the commandment of the king, saying, Ye sons of Israel, turn again to Jehovah, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, that he may return to the remnant of you who escaped out of the hand of the kings of Assyria.
And be ye not like your fathers, and like your brothers, who trespassed against Jehovah, the God of their fathers, so that he gave them up to desolation, as ye see.
Now be ye not stiff-necked, as your fathers were, but yield yourselves to Jehovah, and enter into his sanctuary, which he has sanctified forever, and serve Jehovah your God, that his fierce anger may turn away from you.
For if ye turn again to Jehovah, your brothers and your sons shall find compassion before those who led them captive, and shall come again into this land. For Jehovah your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face from you, if ye return to him.
So the posts passed from city to city through the country of Ephraim and Manasseh, even to Zebulun. But they laughed them to scorn, and mocked them.
Nevertheless certain men of Asher and Manasseh and of Zebulun humbled themselves, and came to Jerusalem.
Also the hand of God came upon Judah to give them one heart, to do the commandment of the king and of the rulers by the word of Jehovah.
And many people assembled at Jerusalem to keep the feast of unleavened bread in the second month, a very great assembly.
And they arose and took away the altars that were in Jerusalem, and all the altars for incense they took away, and cast them into the brook Kidron.
Then they killed the Passover on the fourteenth day of the second month. And the priests and the Levites were ashamed, and sanctified themselves, and brought burnt offerings into the house of Jehovah.
And they stood in their place after their order, according to the law of Moses the man of God; the priests sprinkled the blood which they received from the hand of the Levites.
For there were many in the assembly who had not sanctified themselves. Therefore the Levites had charge of killing the Passovers for everyone who was not clean, to sanctify them to Jehovah.
For a multitude of the people, even many of Ephraim and Manasseh, Issachar and Zebulun, had not cleansed themselves, yet they ate the Passover otherwise than it is written. For Hezekiah had prayed for them, saying, The good Jehovah pardon everyone
who sets his heart to seek God, Jehovah, the God of his fathers, though he be not according to the purification of the sanctuary.
And Jehovah hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people.
And the sons of Israel who were present at Jerusalem kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with great gladness. And the Levites and the priests praised Jehovah day by day, with loud instruments to Jehovah.
And Hezekiah spoke encouragingly to all the Levites who had good understanding in the service of Jehovah. So they ate throughout the feast for the seven days, offering sacrifices of peace offerings, and making confession to Jehovah, the God of their fathers.
And the whole assembly took counsel to keep another seven days. And they kept those seven days with gladness.
For Hezekiah king of Judah gave to the assembly for offerings a thousand bullocks and seven thousand sheep. And the rulers gave to the assembly a thousand bullocks and ten thousand sheep. And a great number of priests sanctified themselves.
And all the assembly of Judah, with the priests and the Levites, and all the assembly that came out of Israel, and the sojourners who came out of the land of Israel, and who dwelt in Judah, rejoiced.
So there was great joy in Jerusalem. For since the time of Solomon the son of David king of Israel there was not the like in Jerusalem.
Then the priests the Levites arose and blessed the people. And their voice was heard, and their prayer came up to his holy habitation, even to heaven.

Now when all this was finished, all Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and broke in pieces the pillars, and hewed down the Asherim, and broke down the high places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin, also in Ephraim and Manasseh, until they had destroyed them all. Then all the sons of Israel returned, every man to his possession, into their own cities.
And Hezekiah appointed the divisions of the priests and the Levites after their divisions, every man according to his service, both the priests and the Levites, for burnt offerings and for peace offerings, to minister, and to give thanks, and to praise in the gates of the camp of Jehovah.
Also he appointed the king's portion of his substance for the burnt offerings, namely, for the morning and evening burnt offerings, and the burnt offerings for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and for the set feasts, as it is written in the law of Jehovah.
Moreover he commanded the people who dwelt in Jerusalem to give the portion of the priests and the Levites, that they might give themselves to the law of Jehovah.
And as soon as the commandment came abroad, the sons of Israel gave in abundance the first-fruits of grain, new wine, and oil, and honey, and of all the increase of the field. And they brought in the tithe of all things abundantly.
And the sons of Israel and Judah, who dwelt in the cities of Judah, they also brought in the tithe of oxen and sheep, and the tithe of dedicated things which were consecrated to Jehovah their God, and laid them by heaps.
In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps, and finished them in the seventh month.
And when Hezekiah and the rulers came and saw the heaps, they blessed Jehovah, and his people Israel.
Then Hezekiah questioned the priests and the Levites concerning the heaps.
And Azariah the chief priest, of the house of Zadok, answered him and said, Since they began to bring the oblations into the house of Jehovah, we have eaten and had enough, and have plenty left. For Jehovah has blessed his people, and that which is left is this great store.
Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of Jehovah, and they prepared them.
And they brought in the oblations and the tithes and the dedicated things faithfully. And Conaniah the Levite was ruler over them, and Shimei his brother was second.
And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, were overseers under the hand of Conaniah and Shimei his brother, by the appointment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the house of God.
And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter at the east gate, was over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the oblations of Jehovah, and the most holy things.
And under him were Eden, and Miniamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah, Amariah, and Shecaniah, in the cities of the priests, in their office of trust, to give to their brothers by divisions, as well to the great as to the small,
besides those who were reckoned by genealogy of males, from three years old and upward, even everyone that entered into the house of Jehovah, as the duty of every day required, for their service in their offices according to their divisions,
and those who were reckoned by genealogy of the priests by their fathers' houses, and the Levites from twenty years old and upward, in their offices by their divisions,
and those who were reckoned by genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their sons, and their daughters, through all the congregation. For in their office of trust they sanctified themselves in holiness.
Also for the sons of Aaron the priests, who were in the fields of the suburbs of their cities, in every city, there were men who were mentioned by name, to give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all who were reckoned by genealogy among the Levites.
And thus Hezekiah did throughout all Judah. And he wrought that which was good and right and faithful before Jehovah his God.
And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God, and in the law, and in the commandments, to seek his God, he did it with all his heart, and prospered.

After these things, and this faithfulness, Sennacherib king of Assyria came, and entered into Judah, and encamped against the fortified cities, and thought to win them for himself.
And when Hezekiah saw that Sennacherib came, and that he intended to fight against Jerusalem,
he took counsel with his rulers and his mighty men to stop the waters of the fountains which were outside the city. And they helped him.
So there was gathered together many people. And they stopped all the fountains, and the brook that flowed through the midst of the land, saying, Why should the kings of Assyria come, and find much water?
And he took courage, and built up all the wall that was broken down, and raised it up to the towers, and the other wall outside, and strengthened Millo in the city of David, and made weapons and shields in abundance.
And he set captains of war over the people, and gathered them together to him in the broad place at the gate of the city, and spoke encouragingly to them, saying,
Be strong and of good courage, be not afraid nor dismayed of the king of Assyria, nor of all the multitude that is with him. For there is a greater with us than with him.
With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is Jehovah our God to help us, and to fight our battles. And the people rested themselves upon the words of Hezekiah king of Judah.
After this Sennacherib king of Assyria sent his servants to Jerusalem (now he was before Lachish, and all his power with him) to Hezekiah king of Judah, and to all Judah that were at Jerusalem, saying,
Thus says Sennacherib king of Assyria, On what do ye trust that ye remain in the siege in Jerusalem?
Does not Hezekiah persuade you, to give you over to die by famine and by thirst, saying, Jehovah our God will deliver us out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
Has not the same Hezekiah taken away his high places and his altars, and commanded Judah and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall worship before one altar, and upon it ye shall burn incense?
Know ye not what I and my fathers have done to all the peoples of the lands? Were the gods of the nations of the lands in any way able to deliver their land out of my hand?
Who was there among all the gods of those nations, which my fathers utterly destroyed, that could deliver his people out of my hand that your God should be able to deliver you out of my hand?
Now therefore let not Hezekiah deceive you, nor persuade you after this manner, neither believe ye him. For no god of any nation or kingdom was able to deliver his people out of my hand, and out of the hand of my fathers. How much less shall your God deliver you out of my hand?
And his servants spoke yet more against Jehovah God, and against his servant Hezekiah.
He also wrote letters, to rail on Jehovah, the God of Israel, and to speak against him, saying, As the gods of the nations of the lands, which have not delivered their people out of my hand, so shall the God of Hezekiah not deliver his people out of my hand.
And they cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language to the people of Jerusalem who were on the wall, to frighten them, and to trouble them, that they might take the city.
And they spoke of the God of Jerusalem, as of the gods of the peoples of the earth, which are the work of men's hands.
And Hezekiah the king, and Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz, prayed because of this, and cried out to heaven.
And Jehovah sent an agent who cut off all the mighty men of valor, and the leaders and captains, in the camp of the king of Assyria. So he returned with shame of face to his own land. And when he came into the house of his god, those who came forth from his own bowels killed him there with the sword.
Thus Jehovah saved Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hand of Sennacherib the king of Assyria, and from the hand of all others, and guided them on every side.
And many brought gifts to Jehovah to Jerusalem, and precious things to Hezekiah king of Judah. So that he was exalted in the sight of all nations from thenceforth.
In those days Hezekiah was sick even to death, and he prayed to Jehovah. And he spoke to him, and gave him a sign.
But Hezekiah did not render again according to the benefit done to him. For his heart was lifted up. Therefore there was wrath upon him, and upon Judah and Jerusalem.
Notwithstanding Hezekiah humbled himself for the pride of his heart, both he and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that the wrath of Jehovah did not come upon them in the days of Hezekiah.
And Hezekiah had exceedingly much riches and honor. And he provided for him treasuries for silver, and for gold, and for precious stones, and for spices, and for shields, and for all manner of goodly vessels,
also store-houses for the increase of grain and new wine and oil, and stalls for all manner of beasts, and flocks in folds.
Moreover he provided for him cities, and possessions of flocks and herds in abundance. For God had given him very much substance.
This same Hezekiah also stopped the upper spring of the waters of Gihon, and brought them straight down on the west side of the city of David. And Hezekiah prospered in all his works.
However in the business of the ambassadors of the rulers of Babylon, who sent to him to inquire of the wonder that was done in the land, God left him, to try him, that he might know all that was in his heart.
Now the rest of the acts of Hezekiah, and his good deeds, behold, they are written in the vision of Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz, in the book of the kings of Judah and Israel.
And Hezekiah slept with his fathers, and they buried him in the ascent of the sepulchers of the sons of David. And all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem honored him at his death. And Manasseh his son reigned in his stead.

Manasseh was twelve years old when he began to reign, and he reigned fifty-five years in Jerusalem.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah after the abominations of the nations whom Jehovah cast out before the sons of Israel.
For he built again the high places which Hezekiah his father had broken down. And he reared up altars for the Baalim, and made Asheroth, and worshiped all the host of heaven, and served them.
And he built altars in the house of Jehovah, of which Jehovah said, In Jerusalem shall my name be forever.
And he built altars for all the host of heaven in the two courts of the house of Jehovah.
He also made his sons to pass through the fire in the valley of the son of Hinnom. And he practiced augury, and used enchantments, and practiced sorcery, and dealt with psychics, and with wizards. He wrought much evil in the sight of Jehovah, to provoke him to anger.
And he set the graven image of the idol which he had made, in the house of God, of which God said to David and to Solomon his son, In this house, and in Jerusalem, which I have chosen out of all the tribes of Israel, I will put my name forever,
neither will I any more remove the foot of Israel from off the land which I have appointed for your fathers, if only they will observe to do all that I have commanded them, even all the law and the statutes and the ordinances given by Moses.
And Manasseh seduced Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so that they did evil more than the nations did whom Jehovah destroyed before the sons of Israel.
And Jehovah spoke to Manasseh, and to his people, but they gave no heed.
Therefore Jehovah brought upon them the captains of the army of the king of Assyria, who took Manasseh in chains, and bound him with fetters, and carried him to Babylon.
And when he was in distress, he besought Jehovah his God, and humbled himself greatly before the God of his fathers.
And he prayed to him. And he was entreated of him, and heard his supplication, and brought him again to Jerusalem into his kingdom. Then Manasseh knew that Jehovah he was God.
Now after this he built an outer wall to the city of David, on the west side of Gihon, in the valley, even to the entrance at the fish gate. And he encompassed Ophel around with it, and raised it up to a very great height. And he put valiant captains in all the fortified cities of Judah.
And he took away the foreign gods, and the idol out of the house of Jehovah, and all the altars that he had built in the mount of the house of Jehovah, and in Jerusalem, and cast them out of the city.
And he built up the altar of Jehovah, and offered on it sacrifices of peace offerings and of thanksgiving, and commanded Judah to serve Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Nevertheless the people still sacrificed in the high places, but only to Jehovah their God.
Now the rest of the acts of Manasseh, and his prayer to his God, and the words of the seers who spoke to him in the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel, behold, they are written among the acts of the kings of Israel.
Also his prayer, and how God was entreated by him, and all his sin and his trespass, and the places in which he built high places, and set up the Asherim and the graven images, before he humbled himself, behold, they are written in the history of Hozai.
So Manasseh slept with his fathers, and they buried him in his own house. And Amon his son reigned in his stead.
Amon was twenty-two years old when he began to reign, and he reigned two years in Jerusalem.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, as did Manasseh his father. And Amon sacrificed to all the graven images which Manasseh his father had made, and served them.
And he did not humble himself before Jehovah, as Manasseh his father had humbled himself, but this same Amon trespassed more and more.
And his servants conspired against him, and put him to death in his own house.
But the people of the land killed all those who had conspired against king Amon. And the people of the land made Josiah his son king in his stead.

Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned thirty-one years in Jerusalem.
And he did that which was right in the eyes of Jehovah, and walked in the ways of David his father, and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left.
For in the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, he began to seek after the God of David his father. And in the twelfth year he began to purge Judah and Jerusalem from the high places, and the Asherim, and the graven images, and the molten images.
And they broke down the altars of the Baalim in his presence, and the sun-images that were on high above them he hewed down, and the Asherim, and the graven images, and the molten images, he broke in pieces, and made dust of them, and strewed it upon the graves of those who had sacrificed to them.
And he burnt the bones of the priests upon their altars, and purged Judah and Jerusalem.
And so also in the cities of Manasseh and Ephraim and Simeon, even to Naphtali, in their ruins round about.
And he broke down the altars, and beat the Asherim and the graven images into powder, and hewed down all the sun-images throughout all the land of Israel, and returned to Jerusalem.
Now in the eighteenth year of his reign, when he had purged the land and the house, he sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, and Maaseiah the governor of the city, and Joah the son of Joahaz the recorder, to repair the house of Jehovah his God.
And they came to Hilkiah the high priest, and delivered the money that was brought into the house of God, which the Levites, the keepers of the threshold, had gathered by the hand of Manasseh and Ephraim, and by all the remnant of Israel, and by all Judah and Benjamin, and by the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And they delivered it into the hand of the workmen who had the oversight of the house of Jehovah. And the workmen who labored in the house of Jehovah gave it to mend and repair the house.
Even to the carpenters and to the builders they gave it, to buy hewn stone, and timber for couplings, and to make beams for the houses which the kings of Judah had destroyed.
And the men did the work faithfully. And the overseers of them were Jahath and Obadiah, the Levites, of the sons of Merari, and Zechariah and Meshullam, of the sons of the Kohathites, to set it forward, and others of the Levites, all who were skilful with instruments of music.
Also they were over the bearers of burdens, and set forward all who did the work in every manner of service. And of the Levites there were scribes, and officers, and porters.
And when they brought out the money that was brought into the house of Jehovah, Hilkiah the priest found the book of the law of Jehovah given by Moses.
And Hilkiah answered and said to Shaphan the scribe, I have found the book of the law in the house of Jehovah. And Hilkiah delivered the book to Shaphan.
And Shaphan carried the book to the king, and moreover brought back word to the king, saying, All that was committed to thy servants, they are doing.
And they have emptied out the money that was found in the house of Jehovah, and have delivered it into the hand of the overseers, and into the hand of the workmen.
And Shaphan the scribe told the king, saying, Hilkiah the priest has delivered a book to me. And Shaphan read therein before the king.
And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the law, that he tore his clothes.
And the king commanded Hilkiah, and Ahikam the son of Shaphan, and Abdon the son of Micah, and Shaphan the scribe, and Asaiah the king's servant, saying,
Go ye, inquire of Jehovah for me, and for those who are left in Israel and in Judah, concerning the words of the book that is found. For great is the wrath of Jehovah that is poured out upon us, because our fathers have not kept the word of Jehovah, to do according to all that is written in this book.
So Hilkiah, and those whom the king had commanded, went to Huldah the prophetess, the wife of Shallum the son of Tokhath, the son of Hasrah, keeper of the wardrobe (now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the second quarter), and they spoke to her to that effect.
Tell ye the man who sent you to me,
Thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of it, even all the curses that are written in the book which they have read before the king of Judah.
Because they have forsaken me, and have burned incense to other gods, that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands. Therefore my wrath is poured out upon this place, and it shall not be quenched.
As concerning the words which thou have heard,
because thy heart was tender, and thou humbled thyself before God when thou heard his words against this place, and against the inhabitants of it, and have humbled thyself before me, and have torn thy clothes, and wept before me, I also have heard thee, says Jehovah.
Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be gathered to thy grave in peace, neither shall thine eyes see all the evil that I will bring upon this place, and upon the inhabitants of it. And they brought back word to the king.
Then the king sent and gathered together all the elders of Judah and Jerusalem.
And the king went up to the house of Jehovah, and all the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and the priests, and the Levites, and all the people, both great and small. And he read in their ears all the words of the book of the covenant that was found in the house of Jehovah.
And the king stood in his place, and made a covenant before Jehovah, to walk after Jehovah, and to keep his commandments, and his testimonies, and his statutes, with all his heart, and with all his soul, to perform the words of the covenant that were written in this book.
And he caused all who were found in Jerusalem and Benjamin to stand to it. And the inhabitants of Jerusalem did according to the covenant of God, the God of their fathers.
And Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that pertained to the sons of Israel, and made all who were found in Israel to serve, even to serve Jehovah their God. All his days they did not depart from following Jehovah, the God of their fathers.

And Josiah kept a Passover to Jehovah in Jerusalem. And they killed the Passover on the fourteenth day of the first month.
And he set the priests in their offices, and encouraged them to the service of the house of Jehovah.
And he said to the Levites who taught all Israel, who were holy to Jehovah, Put the holy ark in the house which Solomon the son of David king of Israel built. There shall no more be a burden upon your shoulders. Now serve Jehovah your God, and his people Israel.
And prepare yourselves after your fathers' houses by your divisions, according to the writing of David king of Israel, and according to the writing of Solomon his son.
And stand in the holy place according to the divisions of the fathers' houses of your brothers the sons of the people, and the portion of a fathers' house of the Levites.
And kill the Passover, and sanctify yourselves, and prepare for your brothers, to do according to the word of Jehovah by Moses.
And Josiah gave to the sons of the people, of the flock, lambs and kids, all of them for the Passover offerings, to all who were present, to the number of thirty thousand, and also three thousand bullocks; these were of the king's substance.
And his rulers gave for a freewill offering to the people, to the priests, and to the Levites. Hilkiah and Zechariah and Jehiel, the rulers of the house of God, gave to the priests for the Passover offerings two thousand and six hundred small cattle, and three hundred oxen.
Conaniah also, and Shemaiah and Nethanel, his brothers, and Hashabiah and Jeiel and Jozabad, the chiefs of the Levites, gave to the Levites for the Passover offerings five thousand small cattle, and five hundred oxen.
So the service was prepared, and the priests stood in their place, and the Levites by their divisions, according to the king's commandment.
And they killed the Passover, and the priests sprinkled the blood by their hand, and the Levites skinned them.
And they removed the burnt offerings that they might give them according to the divisions of the fathers' houses of the sons of the people, to offer to Jehovah as it is written in the book of Moses. And so they did with the oxen.
And they roasted the Passover with fire according to the ordinance. And the holy offerings they boiled in pots, and in caldrons, and in pans, and carried them quickly to all the sons of the people.
And afterward they prepared for themselves, and for the priests, because the priests the sons of Aaron were busy in offering the burnt offerings and the fat until night. Therefore the Levites prepared for themselves, and for the priests the sons of Aaron.
And the singers the sons of Asaph were in their place according to the commandment of David, and Asaph, and Heman, and Jeduthun the king's seer. And the porters were at every gate. They did not need to depart from their service, for their brothers the Levites prepared for them.
So all the service of Jehovah was prepared the same day, to keep the Passover, and to offer burnt offerings upon the altar of Jehovah, according to the commandment of king Josiah.
And the sons of Israel who were present kept the Passover at that time, and the feast of unleavened bread seven days.
And there was no Passover like to that kept in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet. Neither did any of the kings of Israel keep such a Passover as Josiah kept, and the priests, and the Levites, and all Judah and Israel that were present, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
In the eighteenth year of the reign of Josiah this Passover was kept.
After all this, when Josiah had prepared the temple, Neco king of Egypt went up to fight against Carchemish by the Euphrates, and Josiah went out against him.
But he sent ambassadors to him, saying, What have I to do with thee, thou king of Judah? I come not against thee this day, but against the house with which I have war, and God has commanded me to make haste. Cease thee from meddling with God, who is with me, that he not destroy thee.
Nevertheless Josiah would not turn his face from him, but disguised himself that he might fight with him. And he did not hearken to the words of Neco from the mouth of God, and came to fight in the valley of Megiddo.
And the archers shot at king Josiah. And the king said to his servants, Remove me, for I am severely wounded.
So his servants took him out of the chariot, and put him in the second chariot that he had, and brought him to Jerusalem. And he died, and was buried in the sepulchers of his fathers. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.
And Jeremiah lamented for Josiah. And all the singing men and singing women spoke of Josiah in their lamentations to this day. And they made them an ordinance in Israel, and, behold, they are written in the lamentations.
Now the rest of the acts of Josiah, and his good deeds, according to that which is written in the law of Jehovah,
and his acts, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah.

Then the people of the land took Jehoahaz the son of Josiah, and made him king in his father's stead in Jerusalem.
Joahaz was twenty-three years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months in Jerusalem.
And the king of Egypt deposed him at Jerusalem, and fined the land a hundred talents of silver and a talent of gold.
And the king of Egypt made Eliakim his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem, and changed his name to Jehoiakim. And Neco took Joahaz his brother, and carried him to Egypt.
Jehoiakim was twenty-five years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah his God.
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came up against him, and bound him in fetters to carry him to Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar also carried of the vessels of the house of Jehovah to Babylon, and put them in his temple at Babylon.
Now the rest of the acts of Jehoiakim, and his abominations which he did, and that which was found in him, behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel and Judah. And Jehoiachin his son reigned in his stead.
Jehoiachin was eight years old when he began to reign, and he reigned three months and ten days in Jerusalem. And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah.
And at the return of the year king Nebuchadnezzar sent, and brought him to Babylon, with the good vessels of the house of Jehovah, and made Zedekiah his brother king over Judah and Jerusalem.
Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah his God. He did not humble himself before Jeremiah the prophet speaking from the mouth of Jehovah.
And he also rebelled against king Nebuchadnezzar, who had made him swear by God. But he stiffened his neck, and hardened his heart against turning to Jehovah, the God of Israel.
Moreover all the chiefs of the priests, and the people, trespassed very greatly after all the abominations of the nations. And they polluted the house of Jehovah which he had hallowed in Jerusalem.
And Jehovah, the God of their fathers, sent to them by his messengers, rising up early and sending, because he had compassion on his people, and on his dwelling-place.
But they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words, and scoffed at his prophets, until the wrath of Jehovah arose against his people, till there was no remedy.
Therefore he brought upon them the king of the Chaldeans, who killed their young men with the sword in the house of their sanctuary, and had no compassion upon young man or virgin, old man or hoary-headed. He gave them all into his hand.
And all the vessels of the house of God, great and small, and the treasures of the house of Jehovah, and the treasures of the king, and of his rulers, all these he brought to Babylon.
And they burnt the house of God, and broke down the wall of Jerusalem, and burnt all the palaces of it with fire, and destroyed all the good vessels of it.
And those who had escaped from the sword he carried away to Babylon, and they were servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia,
to fulfill the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah, until the land had enjoyed its sabbaths; as long as it lay desolate it kept sabbath, to fulfill seventy years.
Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying,
Thus says Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth has Jehovah, the God of heaven, given me. And he has charged me to build a house for him in Jerusalem, which is in Judah. Whoever there is among you of all his people, Jehovah his God be with him, and let him go up.

Ezra

Now in the first year of Cyrus king of Persia, that the word of Jehovah by the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished, Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, so that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying,
Thus says Cyrus king of Persia, All the kingdoms of the earth has Jehovah, the God of heaven, given me, and he has charged me to build him a house in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.
Whoever there is among you of all his people, his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of Jehovah, the God of Israel (he is God), which is in Jerusalem.
And whoever is left, in any place where he sojourns, let the men of his place help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and with beasts, besides the freewill offering for the house of God which is in Jerusalem.
Then the heads of fathers of Judah and Benjamin, and the priests, and the Levites, even all whose spirit God had stirred, rose up to go up to build the house of Jehovah which is in Jerusalem.
And all those who were round about them strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with precious things, besides all that was willingly offered.
Also Cyrus the king brought forth the vessels of the house of Jehovah, which Nebuchadnezzar had brought forth out of Jerusalem, and had put in the house of his gods,
even those Cyrus king of Persia brought forth by the hand of Mithredath the treasurer, and numbered them to Sheshbazzar, the ruler of Judah.
thirty platters of gold, a thousand platters of silver, twenty-nine knives,
thirty bowls of gold, four hundred and ten silver bowls of a second sort, and a thousand other vessels.
All the vessels of gold and of silver were five thousand and four hundred. All these Sheshbazzar brought up when those of the captivity were brought up from Babylon to Jerusalem.

Now these are the sons of the province who went up out of the captivity of those who had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away to Babylon, and who returned to Jerusalem and Judah, every man to his city,
The sons of Parosh, two thousand a hundred seventy-two.
The sons of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy-two.
The sons of Arah, seven hundred seventy-five.
The sons of Pahath-moab, of the sons of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand eight hundred and twelve.
The sons of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-four.
The sons of Zattu, nine hundred forty-five.
The sons of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty.
The sons of Bani, six hundred forty-two.
The sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty-three.
The sons of Azgad, a thousand two hundred twenty-two.
The sons of Adonikam, six hundred sixty-six.
The sons of Bigvai, two thousand fifty-six.
The sons of Adin, four hundred fifty-four.
The sons of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety-eight.
The sons of Bezai, three hundred twenty-three.
The sons of Jorah, a hundred and twelve.
The sons of Hashum, two hundred twenty-three.
The sons of Gibbar, ninety-five.
The sons of Bethlehem, a hundred twenty-three.
The men of Netophah, fifty-six.
The men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty-eight.
The sons of Azmaveth, forty-two.
The sons of Kiriath-arim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred and forty-three.
The sons of Ramah and Geba, six hundred twenty-one.
The men of Michmas, a hundred twenty-two.
The men of Bethel and Ai, two hundred twenty-three.
The sons of Nebo, fifty-two.
The sons of Magbish, a hundred fifty-six.
The sons of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-four.
The sons of Harim, three hundred and twenty.
The sons of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty-five.
The sons of Jericho, three hundred forty-five.
The sons of Senaah, three thousand and six hundred and thirty.
the sons of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy-three.
The sons of Immer, a thousand fifty-two.
The sons of Pashhur, a thousand two hundred forty-seven.
The sons of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.
the sons of Jeshua and Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodaviah, seventy-four.
the sons of Asaph, a hundred twenty-eight.
the sons of Shallum, the sons of Ater, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Akkub, the sons of Hatita, the sons of Shobai, in all a hundred thirty-nine.
the sons of Ziha, the sons of Hasupha, the sons of Tabbaoth,
the sons of Keros, the sons of Siaha, the sons of Padon,
the sons of Lebanah, the sons of Hagabah, the sons of Akkub,
the sons of Hagab, the sons of Shamlai, the sons of Hanan,
the sons of Giddel, the sons of Gahar, the sons of Reaiah,
the sons of Rezin, the sons of Nekoda, the sons of Gazzam,
the sons of Uzza, the sons of Paseah, the sons of Besai,
the sons of Asnah, the sons of Meunim, the sons of Nephisim,
the sons of Bakbuk, the sons of Hakupha, the sons of Harhur,
the sons of Bazluth, the sons of Mehida, the sons of Harsha,
the sons of Barkos, the sons of Sisera, the sons of Temah,
the sons of Neziah, the sons of Hatipha.
the sons of Sotai, the sons of Hassophereth, the sons of Peruda,
the sons of Jaalah, the sons of Darkon, the sons of Giddel,
the sons of Shephatiah, the sons of Hattil, the sons of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the sons of Ami.
All the Nethinim and the sons of Solomon's servants were three hundred ninety-two.
the sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, the sons of Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two.
the sons of Habaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, the sons of Barzillai who took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name.
These sought their registration among those that were reckoned by genealogy, but they were not found. Therefore they were deemed polluted and put away from the priesthood.
And the governor said to them that they should not eat of the most holy things till there stood up a priest with Urim and with Thummim.
The whole assembly together was forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty,
besides their men-servants and their maid-servants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty-seven. And they had two hundred singing men and singing women.
Their horses were seven hundred thirty-six, their mules, two hundred forty-five,
their camels, four hundred thirty-five, their donkeys, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.
And some of the heads of fathers, when they came to the house of Jehovah which is in Jerusalem, offered willingly for the house of God to set it up in its place.
They gave after their ability into the treasury of the work sixty-one thousand darics of gold, and five thousand pounds of silver, and one hundred priests' garments.
So the priests, and the Levites, and some of the people, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinim, dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities.

And when the seventh month came, and the sons of Israel were in the cities, the people gathered themselves together as one man to Jerusalem.
Then Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and his brothers the priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and his brothers, stood up and built the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings on it as it is written in the law of Moses the man of God.
And they set the altar upon its base, for fear was upon them because of the peoples of the countries. And they offered burnt offerings on it to Jehovah, even burnt offerings morning and evening.
And they kept the feast of tabernacles as it is written, and offered the daily burnt offerings by number according to the ordinance, as the duty of every day required.
And afterward the continual burnt offering, and the offerings of the new moons, and of all the set feasts of Jehovah that were consecrated, and of everyone who willingly offered a freewill offering to Jehovah.
From the first day of the seventh month they began to offer burnt offerings to Jehovah. But the foundation of the temple of Jehovah was not yet laid.
Also they gave money to the masons, and to the carpenters, and food, and drink, and oil, to those of Sidon, and to those of Tyre, to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea, to Joppa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia.
Now in the second year of their coming to the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, and the rest of their brothers the priests and the Levites, and all those who came out of the captivity to Jerusalem, began. And they appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to have the oversight of the work of the house of Jehovah.
the sons of Henadad, with their sons and their brothers the Levites.
And when the builders laid the foundation of the temple of Jehovah, they set the priests in their apparel with trumpets, and the Levites the sons of Asaph with cymbals, to praise Jehovah, after the order of David king of Israel.
And they sang one to another in praising and giving thanks to Jehovah, saying, For he is good, for his loving kindness is forever toward Israel. And all the people shouted with a great shout, when they praised Jehovah, because the foundation of the house of Jehovah was laid.
But many of the priests and Levites and heads of fathers, the old men who had seen the first house, when the foundation of this house was laid before their eyes, wept with a loud voice, and many shouted aloud for joy.
So that the people could not discern the noise of the shout of joy from the noise of the weeping of the people, for the people shouted with a loud shout, and the noise was heard afar off.

Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin heard that the sons of the captivity were building a temple to Jehovah, the God of Israel,
then they drew near to Zerubbabel, and to the heads of fathers, and said to them, Let us build with you, for we seek your God, as ye do, and we sacrifice to him since the days of Esar-haddon king of Assyria who brought us up here.
But Zerubbabel, and Jeshua, and the rest of the heads of fathers of Israel, said to them, Ye have nothing to do with us in building a house to our God, but we ourselves together will build to Jehovah, the God of Israel, as king Cyrus the king of Persia has commanded us.
Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah, and troubled them in building,
and hired counselors against them to frustrate their purpose all the days of Cyrus king of Persia, even until the reign of Darius king of Persia.
And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign, they wrote an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.
And in the days of Artaxerxes, Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of his companions, wrote to Artaxerxes king of Persia. And the writing of the letter was written in the Syrian character, and set forth in the Syrian tongue.
Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe wrote a letter against Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this way.
Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions, the Dinaites, and the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the Archevites, the Babylonians, the Shushanchites, the Dehaites, the Elamites,
and the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Osnappar brought over, and set in the city of Samaria, and in the rest beyond the River, and so forth.
Thy servants the men beyond the River, and so forth.
Be it known to the king, that the Jews who came up from thee have come to us to Jerusalem. They are building the rebellious and the evil city, and have finished the walls, and repaired the foundations.
Be it known now to the king, that, if this city be built, and the walls finished, they will not pay tribute, custom, or toll, and in the end it will be hurtful to the kings.
Now because we eat the salt of the palace, and it is not fitting for us to see the king's dishonor, therefore we have sent and certified to the king,
that search may be made in the book of the records of thy fathers. So thou shall find in the book of the records, and know that this city is a rebellious city, and hurtful to kings and provinces. And that they have made sedition within the same of old time, for which cause this city was laid waste.
We certify to the king that, if this city be built, and the walls finished, by this means thou shall have no portion beyond the River.
Peace, and so forth.
The letter which ye sent to us has been plainly read before me.
And I decreed, and search has been made. And it is found that this city of old time has made insurrection against kings, and that rebellion and sedition have been made in it.
There have also been mighty kings over Jerusalem who have ruled over all the country beyond the River, and tribute, custom, and toll, was paid to them.
Make ye now a decree to cause these men to cease, and that this city not be built until a decree shall be made by me.
And take heed that ye be not slack in this matter. Why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings?
Then when the copy of king Artaxerxes' letter was read before Rehum, and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, they went in haste to Jerusalem to the Jews, and made them cease by force and power.
Then the work of the house of God which is at Jerusalem ceased, and it ceased until the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia.

Now the prophets, Haggai the prophet, and Zechariah the son of Iddo, prophesied to the Jews who were in Judah and Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel, to them.
Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son of Jozadak, rose up and began to build the house of God which is at Jerusalem, and with them were the prophets of God, helping them.
At the same time Tattenai, the governor beyond the River, and Shethar-bozenai, and their companions, came to them, and said thus to them, Who gave you a decree to build this house, and to finish this wall?
Then we told them after this manner, namely, what the names of the men were who were making this building.
But the eye of their God was upon the elders of the Jews, and they did not make them cease till the matter should come to Darius, and then answer should be returned by letter concerning it.
The copy of the letter that Tattenai, the governor beyond the River, and Shethar-bozenai, and his companions the Apharsachites, who were beyond the River, sent to Darius the king;
To Darius the king, all peace.
Be it known to the king, that we went into the province of Judah to the house of the great God, which is built with great stones, and timber is laid in the walls. And this work goes on with diligence and prospers in their hands.
Who gave you a decree to build this house, and to finish this wall?
Also, we asked them their names, to certify to thee, that we might write the names of the men who were at the head of them.
And thus they returned us an answer, saying, We are the servants of the God of heaven and earth. And are building the house that was built these many years ago, which a great king of Israel built and finished.
But after that our fathers had provoked the God of heaven to wrath. He gave them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, the Chaldean, who destroyed this house, and carried the people away into Babylon.
But in the first year of Cyrus king of Babylon, Cyrus the king made a decree to build this house of God.
And also the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took out of the temple that was in Jerusalem, and brought into the temple of Babylon, those Cyrus the king took out of the temple of Babylon, and they were delivered to one whose name was Sheshbazzar whom he had made governor.
And he said to him, Take these vessels. Go put them in the temple that is in Jerusalem, and let the house of God be built in its place.
Then the same Sheshbazzar came, and laid the foundations of the house of God which is in Jerusalem. And since that time even until now it has been in building, and yet it is not completed.
Now therefore, if it seems good to the king, let there be search made in the king's treasure-house, which is there at Babylon, whether it be so, that a decree was made from Cyrus the king to build this house of God at Jerusalem, and let the king send his pleasure to us concerning this matter.

Then Darius the king made a decree, and search was made in the house of the archives where the treasures were laid up in Babylon.
Concerning the house of God at Jerusalem, let the house be built-the place where they offer sacrifices-and let the foundations of it be strongly laid, the height of it sixty cubits, and the breadth of it sixty cubits,
with three courses of great stones, and a course of new timber. And let the expenses be given out of the king's house.
And also let the gold and silver vessels of the house of God, which Nebuchadnezzar took forth out of the temple which is at Jerusalem, and brought to Babylon, be restored, and brought again to the temple which is at Jerusalem, every one to its place. And thou shall put them in the house of God.
Let the work of this house of God alone. Let the governor of the Jews and the elders of the Jews build this house of God in its place.
That of the king's goods, even of the tribute beyond the River, expenses be given with all diligence to these men, that they not be hindered.
And that which they have need of, both young bullocks, and rams, and lambs, for burnt offerings to the God of heaven, also wheat, salt, wine, and oil, according to the word of the priests who are at Jerusalem, let it be given them day by day without fail
that they may offer sacrifices of sweet savor to the God of heaven, and pray for the life of the king, and of his sons.
Also I have made a decree, that whoever shall alter this word, let a beam be pulled out from his house, and let him be lifted up and fastened thereon, and let his house be made a dunghill for this.
And the God who has caused his name to dwell there overthrow all kings and peoples who shall put forth their hand to alter the same, to destroy this house of God which is at Jerusalem. I Darius have made a decree, let it be done with all diligence.
Then Tattenai, the governor beyond the River, Shethar-bozenai, and their companions, because of what Darius the king had sent, did accordingly with all diligence.
And the elders of the Jews built and prospered, through the prophesying of Haggai the prophet and Zechariah the son of Iddo. And they built and finished it according to the commandment of the God of Israel, and according to the decree of Cyrus, and Darius, and Artaxerxes king of Persia.
And this house was finished on the third day of the month Adar, which was in the sixth year of the reign of Darius the king.
And the sons of Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the rest of the sons of the captivity, kept the dedication of this house of God with joy.
And they offered at the dedication of this house of God a hundred bullocks, two hundred rams, four hundred lambs. And for a sin offering for all Israel, twelve he-goats, according to the number of the tribes of Israel.
And they set the priests in their divisions, and the Levites in their divisions, for the service of God, which is at Jerusalem, as it is written in the book of Moses.
And the sons of the captivity kept the Passover upon the fourteenth day of the first month.
For the priests and the Levites had purified themselves together, all of them were pure. And they killed the Passover for all the sons of the captivity, and for their brothers the priests, and for themselves.
And the sons of Israel who came again out of the captivity, and all such as had separated themselves to them from the filthiness of the nations of the land, to seek Jehovah, the God of Israel, ate,
and kept the feast of unleavened bread seven days with joy. For Jehovah had made them joyful, and had turned the heart of the king of Assyria to them, to strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God, the God of Israel.

Now after these things, in the reign of Artaxerxes king of Persia, Ezra the son of Seraiah, the son of Azariah, the son of Hilkiah,
the son of Shallum, the son of Zadok, the son of Ahitub,
the son of Amariah, the son of Azariah, the son of Meraioth,
the son of Zerahiah, the son of Uzzi, the son of Bukki,
the son of Abishua, the son of Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the chief priest,
this Ezra went up from Babylon. And he was a skilled scribe in the law of Moses, which Jehovah, the God of Israel, had given. And the king granted him all his request, according to the hand of Jehovah his God upon him.
And some of the sons of Israel, and of the priests, and the Levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the Nethinim, went up to Jerusalem in the seventh year of Artaxerxes the king.
And he came to Jerusalem in the fifth month, which was in the seventh year of the king.
For upon the first day of the first month he began to go up from Babylon, and on the first day of the fifth month he came to Jerusalem, according to the good hand of his God upon him.
For Ezra had set his heart to seek the law of Jehovah, and to do it, and to teach in Israel statutes and ordinances.
Artaxerxes, king of kings, to Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, perfect and so forth.
I make a decree, that all those of the people of Israel, and their priests and the Levites, in my realm, who are minded of their own free will to go to Jerusalem, go with thee.
Forasmuch as thou are sent from the king and his seven counselors, to inquire concerning Judah and Jerusalem, according to the law of thy God which is in thy hand,
and to carry the silver and gold, which the king and his counselors have freely offered to the God of Israel, whose habitation is in Jerusalem,
and all the silver and gold that thou shall find in all the province of Babylon, with the freewill offering of the people, and of the priests, offering willingly, for the house of their God which is in Jerusalem.
Therefore thou shall with all diligence buy with this money bullocks, rams, lambs, with their meal offerings and their drink offerings, and shall offer them upon the altar of the house of your God which is in Jerusalem.
And whatever shall seem good to thee and to thy brothers to do with the rest of the silver and the gold, that do ye after the will of your God.
And the vessels that are given thee for the service of the house of thy God, deliver thou before the God of Jerusalem.
And whatever more shall be needful for the house of thy God, which thou shall have occasion to bestow, bestow it out of the king's treasure-house.
And I, even I Artaxerxes the king, do make a decree to all the treasurers who are beyond the River, that whatever Ezra the priest, the scribe of the law of the God of heaven, shall require of you, it be done with all diligence,
to a hundred talents of silver, and to a hundred measures of wheat, and to a hundred baths of wine, and to a hundred baths of oil, and salt without prescribing how much.
Whatever is commanded by the God of heaven, let it be done exactly for the house of the God of heaven; for why should there be wrath against the realm of the king and his sons?
Also we certify to you, that concerning any of the priests and Levites, the singers, porters, Nethinim, or servants of this house of God, it shall not be lawful to impose tribute, custom, or toll, upon them.
And thou, Ezra, according to the wisdom of thy God, that is in thy hand, appoint magistrates and judges, who may judge all the people who are beyond the River, all such as know the laws of thy God, and teach ye him who does not know them.
And whoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed upon him with all diligence, whether it be to death, or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment.
Blessed be Jehovah, the God of our fathers, who has put such a thing as this in the king's heart, to beautify the house of Jehovah which is in Jerusalem,
and has extended loving kindness to me before the king, and his counselors, and before all the king's mighty rulers. And I was strengthened according to the hand of Jehovah my God upon me, and I gathered together out of Israel chief men to go up with me.

of the sons of Phinehas, Gershom; of the sons of Ithamar, Daniel; of the sons of David, Hattush;
of the sons of Shecaniah, of the sons of Parosh, Zechariah, and with him were reckoned by genealogy of the males a hundred and fifty;
of the sons of Pahath-moab, Eliehoenai the son of Zerahiah, and with him two hundred males;
of the sons of Shecaniah, the son of Jahaziel, and with him three hundred males;
and of the sons of Adin, Ebed the son of Jonathan, and with him fifty males;
and of the sons of Elam, Jeshaiah the son of Athaliah, and with him seventy males;
and of the sons of Shephatiah, Zebadiah the son of Michael, and with him eighty males;
of the sons of Joab, Obadiah the son of Jehiel, and with him two hundred and eighteen males;
and of the sons of Shelomith, the son of Josiphiah, and with him a hundred and sixty males;
and of the sons of Bebai, Zechariah the son of Bebai, and with him twenty-eight males;
and of the sons of Azgad, Johanan the son of Hakkatan, and with him a hundred and ten males;
Eliphelet, Jeuel, and Shemaiah, and with them sixty males;
and of the sons of Bigvai, Uthai and Zabbud, and with them seventy males.
And I gathered them together to the river that runs to Ahava, and there we encamped three days. And I viewed the people, and the priests, and found there none of the sons of Levi.
Then I sent for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for Meshullam, chief men, also for Joiarib, and for Elnathan, who were teachers.
And I sent them forth to Iddo the chief at the place Casiphia, and I told them what they should say to Iddo, and his brothers the Nethinim, at the place Casiphia, that they should bring to us ministers for the house of our God.
And according to the good hand of our God upon us they brought us a man of discretion, of the sons of Mahli, the son of Levi, the son of Israel, and Sherebiah, with his sons and his brothers, eighteen,
and Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari, his brothers and their sons, twenty,
and of the Nethinim, whom David and the rulers had given for the service of the Levites, two hundred and twenty Nethinim. All of them were mentioned by name.
Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river Ahava, that we might humble ourselves before our God, to seek of him a straight way for us, and for our little ones, and for all our substance.
For I was ashamed to ask of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen to help us against the enemy in the way, because we had spoken to the king, saying, The hand of our God is upon all those who seek him, for good, but his power and his wrath are against all those who forsake him.
So we fasted and besought our God for this, and he was entreated by us.
Then I set apart twelve of the chiefs of the priests, even Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brothers with them,
and weighed to them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, even the offering for the house of our God, which the king, and his counselors, and his rulers, and all Israel there present, had offered.
I weighed into their hand six hundred and fifty talents of silver, and a hundred talents of silver vessels, a hundred talents of gold,
and twenty bowls of gold, of a thousand darics, and two vessels of fine bright brass, precious as gold.
And I said to them, Ye are holy to Jehovah, and the vessels are holy, and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering to Jehovah, the God of your fathers.
Watch ye, and keep them, until ye weigh them before the chiefs of the priests and the Levites, and the rulers of the fathers of Israel, at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the house of Jehovah.
So the priests and the Levites received the weight of the silver and the gold, and the vessels, to bring them to Jerusalem to the house of our God.
Then we departed from the river Ahava on the twelfth day of the first month, to go to Jerusalem. And the hand of our God was upon us, and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy and the ambushment by the way.
And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days.
And on the fourth day the silver and the gold and the vessels were weighed in the house of our God into the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest, and with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas, and with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of Binnui, the Levite,
the whole by number and by weight. And all the weight was written at that time.
The sons of the captivity, who came out of exile, offered burnt offerings to the God of Israel, twelve bullocks for all Israel, ninety-six rams, seventy-seven lambs, twelve he-goats for a sin offering. All this was a burnt offering to Jehovah.
And they delivered the king's commissions to the king's satraps, and to the governors beyond the River. And they furthered the people and the house of God.

Now when these things were done, the rulers drew near to me, saying, The people of Israel, and the priests and the Levites, have not separated themselves from the peoples of the lands, doing according to their abominations, even of the Canaanites, the Hittites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites.
For they have taken of their daughters for themselves and for their sons, so that the holy seed have mingled themselves with the peoples of the lands. Yea, the hand of the heads and rulers has been chief in this trespass.
And when I heard this thing, I tore my garment and my robe, and plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard, and sat down confounded.
Then everyone who trembled at the words of the God of Israel were assembled to me, because of the trespass of those of the captivity, and I sat confounded until the evening oblation.
And at the evening oblation I arose up from my humiliation, even with my garment and my robe torn, and I fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands to Jehovah my God,
and I said, O my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God, for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our guiltiness has grown up to the heavens.
Since the days of our fathers we have been exceedingly guilty to this day. And for our iniquities have we, our kings, and our priests, been delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands, to the sword, to captivity, and to plunder, and to confusion of face, as it is this day.
And now for a little moment grace has been shown from Jehovah our God, to leave us a remnant to escape, and to give us a nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage.
For we are bondmen, yet our God has not forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended loving kindness to us in the sight of the kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, to set up the house of our God, and to repair the ruins of it, and to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem.
And now, O our God, what shall we say after this? For we have forsaken thy commandments,
which thou have commanded by thy servants the prophets, saying, The land, to which ye go to possess it, is an unclean land through the uncleanness of the peoples of the lands, through their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another with their filthiness.
Now therefore do not give your daughters to their sons, neither take their daughters to your sons, nor seek their peace or their prosperity forever, that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land, and leave it for an inheritance to your sons forever.
And after all that has come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great guilt, seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and have given us such a remnant,
shall we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the peoples who do these abominations? Would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, nor any to escape?
O Jehovah, the God of Israel, thou are righteous, for we are left a remnant that is escaped, as it is this day. Behold, we are before thee in our guiltiness, for none can stand before thee because of this.

Now while Ezra prayed and made confession, weeping and casting himself down before the house of God, there was gathered together to him out of Israel a very great assembly of men and women and children, for the people wept very much.
And Shecaniah the son of Jehiel, one of the sons of Elam, answered and said to Ezra, We have trespassed against our God, and have married foreign women of the peoples of the land. Yet now there is hope for Israel concerning this thing.
Now therefore let us make a covenant with our God to put away all the wives, and such as are born of them, according to the counsel of my lord, and of those who tremble at the commandment of our God, and let it be done according to the law.
Arise, for the matter belongs to thee, and we are with thee. Be of good courage, and do it.
Then Ezra arose, and made the chiefs of the priests, the Levites, and all Israel, to swear that they would do according to this word. So they swore.
Then Ezra rose up from before the house of God, and went into the chamber of Jehohanan the son of Eliashib. And when he came there, he ate no bread, nor drank water, for he mourned because of the trespass of those of the captivity.
And they made proclamation throughout Judah and Jerusalem to all the sons of the captivity, that they should gather themselves together to Jerusalem.
And that whoever did not come within three days, according to the counsel of the rulers and the elders, all his substance should be forfeited, and himself separated from the assembly of the captivity.
Then all the men of Judah and Benjamin gathered themselves together to Jerusalem within the three days. It was the ninth month, on the twentieth day of the month, and all the people sat in the broad place before the house of God, trembling because of this matter, and for the great rain.
And Ezra the priest stood up, and said to them, Ye have trespassed, and have married foreign women to increase the guilt of Israel.
Now therefore make confession to Jehovah, the God of your fathers, and do his pleasure, and separate yourselves from the peoples of the land, and from the foreign women.
Then all the assembly answered and said with a loud voice, As thou have said concerning us, so must we do.
But the people are many, and it is a time of much rain, and we are not able to stand outside. Neither is this a work of one day or two, for we have greatly transgressed in this matter.
Let now our rulers be appointed for all the assembly, and let all those who are in our cities who have married foreign women come at appointed times, and with them the elders of every city, and the judges thereof, until the fierce wrath of our God be turned from us, until this matter be dispatched.
Only Jonathan the son of Asahel and Jahzeiah the son of Tikvah stood up against this, and Meshullam and Shabbethai the Levite helped them.
And the sons of the captivity did so. And Ezra the priest, with certain heads of fathers, after their fathers' houses, and all of them by their names, were set apart. And they sat down in the first day of the tenth month to examine the matter.
And they made an end with all the men who had married foreign women by the first day of the first month.
And among the sons of the priests there were found who had married foreign women, namely, of the sons of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and his brothers, Maaseiah, and Eliezer, and Jarib, and Gedaliah.
And they gave their hand that they would put away their wives. And being guilty, they offered a ram of the flock for their guilt.
Hanani and Zebadiah.
Maaseiah, and Elijah, and Shemaiah, and Jehiel, and Uzziah.
Elioenai, Maaseiah, Ishmael, Nethanel, Jozabad, and Elasah.
Jozabad, and Shimei, and Kelaiah (the same is Kelita), Pethahiah, Judah, and Eliezer.
Shallum, and Telem, and Uri.
Of the sons of Parosh, Ramiah, and Izziah, and Malchijah, and Mijamin, and Eleazar, and Malchijah, and Benaiah.
Mattaniah, Zechariah, and Jehiel, and Abdi, and Jeremoth, and Elijah.
Elioenai, Eliashib, Mattaniah, and Jeremoth, and Zabad, and Aziza.
Jehohanan, Hananiah, Zabbai, Athlai.
Meshullam, Malluch, and Adaiah, Jashub, and Sheal, Jeremoth.
Adna, and Chelal, Benaiah, Maaseiah, Mattaniah, Bezalel, and Binnui, and Manasseh.
Eliezer, Isshijah, Malchijah, Shemaiah, Shimeon,
Benjamin, Malluch, Shemariah.
Mattenai, Mattattah, Zabad, Eliphelet, Jeremai, Manasseh, Shimei.
Maadai, Amram, and Uel,
Benaiah, Bedeiah, Cheluhi,
Vaniah, Meremoth, Eliashib,
Mattaniah, Mattenai, and Jaasu,
and Bani, and Binnui, Shimei,
and Shelemiah, and Nathan, and Adaiah,
Machnadebai, Shashai, Sharai,
Azarel, and Shelemiah, Shemariah,
Shallum, Amariah, Joseph.
Jeiel, Mattithiah, Zabad, Zebina, Iddo, and Joel, Benaiah.
All these had taken foreign wives, and some of them had wives by whom they had sons.

Nehemiah

The words of Nehemiah the son of Hacaliah. Now it came to pass in the month Chislev, in the twentieth year, as I was in Shushan the palace,
that Hanani, one of my brothers, came, he and certain men out of Judah. And I asked them concerning the Jews who had escaped, that were left of the captivity, and concerning Jerusalem.
And they said to me, The remnant who are left of the captivity there in the province are in great affliction and reproach. Also the wall of Jerusalem is broken down, and the gates of it are burned with fire.
And it came to pass, when I heard these words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned certain days. And I fasted and prayed before the God of heaven,
Let thine ear now be attentive, and thine eyes open, that thou may hearken to the prayer of thy servant, which I pray before thee at this time, day and night, for the sons of Israel thy servants while I confess the sins of the sons of Israel, which we have sinned against thee. Yea, I and my father's house have sinned.
We have dealt very corruptly against thee, and have not kept the commandments, nor the statutes, nor the ordinances, which thou commanded thy servant Moses.
Remember, I beseech thee, the word that thou commanded thy servant Moses, saying, If ye trespass, I will scatter you abroad among the peoples,
but if ye return to me, and keep my commandments and do them, though your outcasts were in the outermost part of the heavens, yet I will gather them from there, and will bring them to the place that I have chosen, to cause my name to dwell there.
Now these are thy servants and thy people whom thou have redeemed by thy great power, and by thy strong hand.
O Lord, I beseech thee, let now thine ear be attentive to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of thy servants, who delight to fear thy name, and, I pray thee, prosper thy servant this day, and grant him mercy in the sight of this man. Now I was cupbearer to the king.

And it came to pass in the month Nisan, in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes the king, when wine was before him, that I took up the wine, and gave it to the king. Now I had not formerly been sad in his presence.
And the king said to me, Why is thy countenance sad, seeing thou are not sick? This is nothing else but sorrow of heart. Then I was very much afraid.
And I said to the king, Let the king live forever. Why should not my countenance be sad, when the city, the place of my fathers' sepulchers, lies waste, and the gates of it are consumed with fire?
Then the king said to me, For what do thou make request? So I prayed to the God of heaven.
And I said to the king, If it please the king, and if thy servant has found favor in thy sight, that thou would send me to Judah, to the city of my fathers' sepulchers, that I may build it.
And the king said to me (the queen also sitting by him), For how long shall thy journey be? And when will thou return? So it pleased the king to send me, and I set him a time.
Moreover I said to the king, If it please the king, let letters be given to me to the governors beyond the River, that they may let me pass through till I come to Judah,
and a letter to Asaph the keeper of the king's forest, that he may give me timber to make beams for the gates of the castle which appertains to the house, and for the wall of the city, and for the house that I shall enter into. And the king granted me, according to the good hand of my God upon me.
Then I came to the governors beyond the River, and gave them the king's letters. Now the king had sent with me captains of the army and horsemen.
And when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly that there came a man to seek the welfare of the sons of Israel.
So I came to Jerusalem, and was there three days.
And I arose in the night, I and some few men with me. I neither told any man what my God put into my heart to do for Jerusalem, nor was there any beast with me except the beast that I rode upon.
And I went out by night by the valley gate, even toward the jackal's well and to the dung gate, and viewed the walls of Jerusalem, which were broken down, and the gates of it were consumed with fire.
Then I went on to the fountain gate and to the king's pool, but there was no place for the beast that was under me to pass.
Then I went up in the night by the brook, and viewed the wall. And I turned back, and entered by the valley gate, and so returned.
And the rulers did not know where I went, or what I did, neither had I as yet told it to the Jews, nor to the priests, nor to the ranking men, nor to the rulers, nor to the rest who did the work.
Then I said to them, Ye see the evil condition that we are in, how Jerusalem lies waste, and the gates of it are burned with fire. Come, and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem that we be no more a reproach.
And I told them of the hand of my God which was good upon me, as also of the king's words that he had spoken to me. And they said, Let us rise up and build. So they strengthened their hands for the good work.
But when Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, heard it, they laughed us to scorn, and despised us, and said, What is this thing that ye do? Will ye rebel against the king?
Then I answered them, and said to them, The God of heaven, he will prosper us. Therefore we his servants will arise and build, but ye have no portion, nor right, nor memorial, in Jerusalem.

Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brothers the priests, and they built the sheep gate. They sanctified it, and set up the doors of it, even to the tower of Hammeah they sanctified it, to the tower of Hananel.
And next to him the men of Jericho built. And next to them Zaccur the son of Imri built.
And the sons of Hassenaah built the fish gate. They laid the beams of it, and set up the doors of it, the bolts of it, and the bars of it.
And next to them Meremoth the son of Uriah, the son of Hakkoz repaired. And next to them Meshullam the son of Berechiah, the son of Meshezabel repaired. And next to them Zadok the son of Baana repaired.
And next to them the Tekoites repaired, but their ranking men did not put their necks to the work of their lord.
And the old gate Joiada the son of Paseah and Meshullam the son of Besodeiah repaired. They laid the beams of it, and set up the doors of it, and the bolts of it, and the bars of it.
And next to them Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the Meronothite, the men of Gibeon, and of Mizpah, who pertained to the throne of the governor beyond the River, repaired.
Next to him Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, goldsmiths, repaired. And next to him Hananiah one of the perfumers repaired. And they fortified Jerusalem even to the broad wall.
And next to them Rephaiah the son of Hur, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, repaired.
And next to them Jedaiah the son of Harumaph, repaired opposite his house. And next to him Hattush the son of Hashabneiah repaired.
Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hasshub the son of Pahath-moab, repaired another portion, and the tower of the furnaces.
And next to him Shallum the son of Hallohesh, the ruler of half the district of Jerusalem, repaired, he and his daughters.
Hanun, and the inhabitants of Zanoah, repaired the valley gate. They built it, and set up the doors of it, the bolts of it, and the bars of it, and a thousand cubits of the wall to the dung gate.
And Malchijah the son of Rechab, the ruler of the district of Beth-haccherem, repaired the dung gate. He built it, and set up the doors of it, the bolts of it, and the bars of it.
And Shallun the son of Col-hozeh, the ruler of the district of Mizpah, repaired the fountain gate. He built it, and covered it, and set up the doors of it, the bolts of it, and the bars of it, and the wall of the pool of Shelah by the king's garden, even to the stairs that go down from the city of David.
After him Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of half the district of Beth-zur, repaired to the place opposite the sepulchers of David, and to the pool that was made, and to the house of the mighty men.
After him the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani, repaired. Next to him Hashabiah, the ruler of half the district of Keilah, repaired for his district.
After him their brothers, Bavvai the son of Henadad, the ruler of half the district of Keilah, repaired.
And next to him Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah, repaired another portion opposite the ascent to the armory at the turning of the wall.
After him Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly repaired another portion, from the turning of the wall to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.
After him Meremoth the son of Uriah the son of Hakkoz repaired another portion, from the door of the house of Eliashib even to the end of the house of Eliashib.
And after him the priests, the men of the Plain, repaired.
After them Benjamin and Hasshub repaired opposite their house. After them Azariah the son of Maaseiah the son of Ananiah repaired beside his own house.
After him Binnui the son of Henadad repaired another portion, from the house of Azariah to the turning of the wall, and to the corner.
Palal the son of Uzai repaired opposite the turning of the wall, and the tower that stands out from the upper house of the king, which is by the court of the guard. After him Pedaiah the son of Parosh repaired.
(Now the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel, to the place opposite the water gate toward the east, and the tower that stands out.)
After him the Tekoites repaired another portion, opposite the great tower that stands out, and to the wall of Ophel.
The priests repaired above the horse gate, every man opposite his own house.
After them Zadok the son of Immer repaired opposite his own house. And after him Shemaiah the son of Shecaniah, the keeper of the east gate, repaired.
After him Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, repaired another portion. After him Meshullam the son of Berechiah repaired opposite his chamber.
After him Malchijah one of the goldsmiths to the house of the Nethinim, and of the merchants, repaired opposite the gate of Hammiphkad, and to the ascent of the corner.
And between the ascent of the corner and the sheep gate the goldsmiths and the merchants repaired.

But it came to pass that, when Sanballat heard that we were building the wall, he was angry, and took great indignation, and mocked the Jews.
And he spoke before his brothers and the army of Samaria, and said, What are these feeble Jews doing? Will they fortify themselves? Will they sacrifice? Will they finish in a day? Will they revive the stones out of the heaps of rubbish, seeing they are burnt?
Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him, and he said, Even that which they are building, if a fox goes up he shall break down their stone wall.
Hear, O our God, for we are despised, and so turn back their reproach upon their own head, and give them up for a spoil in a land of captivity,
and do not cover their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from before thee, for they have provoked thee to anger before the builders.
So we built the wall, and all the wall was joined together to half the height of it, for the people had a mind to work.
But it came to pass that, when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the Arabians, and the Ammonites, and the Ashdodites, heard that the repairing of the walls of Jerusalem went forward, and that the breaches began to be stopped, then they were very angry,
and all of them together conspired to come and fight against Jerusalem, and to cause confusion therein.
But we made our prayer to our God, and set a watch against them day and night, because of them.
And Judah said, The strength of the bearers of burdens has become feeble, and there is much rubbish, so that we are not able to build the wall.
And our adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we come into the midst of them, and kill them, and cause the work to cease.
And it came to pass that, when the Jews who dwelt by them came, they said to us ten times, From all places from where ye shall return to us they will be upon you.
Therefore I set in the lowest parts of the space behind the wall, in the open places, I set there the people after their families with their swords, their spears, and their bows.
And I looked, and rose up, and said to the ranking men, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the people, Be not ye afraid of them. Remember the Lord, who is great and awesome, and fight for your brothers, your sons, and your daughters, your wives, and your houses.
And it came to pass, when our enemies heard that it was known to us, and God had brought their counsel to naught, that we returned all of us to the wall, every man to his work.
And it came to pass from that time forth, that half of my servants labored in the work, and half of them held the spears, the shields, and the bows, and the coats of mail. And the rulers were behind all the house of Judah.
They all built the wall, and those who bore burdens loaded themselves, every man with one of his hands labored in the work, and with the other held his weapon,
and the builders, every man had his sword girded by his side, and so built. And he who sounded the trumpet was by me.
And I said to the ranking men, and to the rulers and to the rest of the people, The work is great and large, and we are separated upon the wall, one far from another.
In whatever place ye hear the sound of the trumpet, gather ye there to us, our God will fight for us.
So we labored in the work, and half of them held the spears from the rising of the morning till the stars appeared.
Likewise at the same time I said to the people, Let each with his servant lodge within Jerusalem that in the night they may be a guard to us, and may labor in the day.
So neither I, nor my brothers, nor my servants, nor the men of the guard who followed me, none of us put off our clothes, everyone went with his weapon to the water.

Then there arose a great cry of the people and of their wives against their brothers the Jews.
For there were who said, We, our sons and our daughters, are many. Let us get grain that we may eat and live.
There were some also who said, We are mortgaging our fields, and our vineyards, and our houses. Let us get grain because of the dearth.
There were also who said, We have borrowed money for the king's tribute upon our fields and our vineyards.
Yet now our flesh is as the flesh of our brothers, our sons as their sons. And, lo, we bring into bondage our sons and our daughters to be servants, and some of our daughters are brought into bondage already. Neither is it in our power to help it, for other men have our fields and our vineyards.
And I was very angry when I heard their cry and these words.
Then I consulted with myself, and contended with the ranking men and the rulers, and said to them, Ye exact usury, everyone of his brother. And I held a great assembly against them.
And I said to them, According to our ability we have redeemed our brothers the Jews, who were sold to the nations, and would ye even sell your brothers, and should they be sold to us? Then they were silent, and found not a word.
Also I said, The thing that ye do is not good. Ought ye not to walk in the fear of our God, because of the reproach of the nations our enemies?
And I likewise, my brothers and my servants, lend them money and grain. I pray you, let us leave off this usury.
Restore, I pray you, to them, even this day, their fields, their vineyards, their oliveyards, and their houses, also the hundredth part of the money, and of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, that ye exact of them.
Then they said, We will restore them, and will require nothing of them, so will we do, even as thou say. Then I called the priests, and took an oath from them that they would do according to this promise.
Also I shook out my lap, and said, So God shake out every man from his house, and from his labor, who does not perform this promise, even thus be he shaken out and emptied. And all the assembly said, Truly, and praised Jehovah. And the people did according to this promise.
Moreover from the time that I was appointed to be their governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even to the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes the king, that is, twelve years, I and my brothers have not eaten the bread of the governor.
But the former governors who were before me charged the people, and took bread and wine from them, besides forty shekels of silver. Yes, even their servants bore rule over the people. But I did not so, because of the fear of God.
Yea, also I continued in the work of this wall, neither did we buy any land. And all my servants were gathered there to the work.
Moreover there were at my table, of the Jews and the rulers, a hundred and fifty men, besides those who came to us from among the nations that were round about us.
Now that which was prepared for one day was one ox and six choice sheep, also fowls were prepared for me, and once in ten days store of all sorts of wine. Yet for all this I did not demand the bread of the governor, because the bondage was heavy upon this people.
Remember to me, O my God, for good, all that I have done for this people.

Now it came to pass, when it was reported to Sanballat and Tobiah, and to Geshem the Arabian, and to the rest of our enemies, that I had built the wall, and that there was no breach left in it, (though even to that time I had not set up the doors in the gates),
that Sanballat and Geshem sent to me, saying, Come, let us meet together in one of the villages in the plain of Ono. But they thought to do me mischief.
And I sent messengers to them, saying, I am doing a great work, so that I cannot come down. Why should the work cease while I leave it, and come down to you?
And they sent to me four times after this sort, and I answered them after the same manner.
Then Sanballat sent his servant to me in like manner the fifth time with an open letter in his hand
in which was written, It is reported among the nations, and Gashmu says it, that thou and the Jews think to rebel, for which cause thou are building the wall. And thou would be their king according to these words.
And thou have also appointed prophets to preach of thee at Jerusalem, saying, There is a king in Judah. And now it shall be reported to the king according to these words. Come now therefore, and let us take counsel together.
Then I sent to him, saying, There are no such things done as thou say, but thou imagine them out of thine own heart.
For they all would have made us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work that it not be done. But now, O God, strengthen thou my hands.
And I went to the house of Shemaiah the son of Delaiah the son of Mehetabel, who was shut up, and he said, Let us meet together in the house of God, within the temple, and let us shut the doors of the temple. For they will come to kill thee, yea, they will come to kill thee in the night.
And I said, Should such a man as I flee? And who is there, that, being such as I, would go into the temple to save his life? I will not go in.
And I discerned, and, lo, God had not sent him, but he pronounced this prophecy against me, and Tobiah and Sanballat had hired him.
For this cause he was hired, that I should be afraid, and do so, and sin, and that they might have matter for an evil report, that they might reproach me.
Remember, O my God, Tobiah and Sanballat according to these their works, and also the prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the prophets, who would have put me in fear.
So the wall was finished in the twenty-fifth day of the month Elul, in fifty-two days.
And it came to pass, when all our enemies heard of it, that all the nations that were around us feared, and were much cast down in their own eyes, for they perceived that this work was wrought of our God.
Moreover in those days the ranking men of Judah sent many letters to Tobiah, and the letters of Tobiah came to them.
For there were many in Judah sworn to him because he was the son-in-law of Shecaniah the son of Arah, and his son Jehohanan had taken the daughter of Meshullam the son of Berechiah to wife.
Also they spoke of his good deeds before me, and reported my words to him. And Tobiah sent letters to put me in fear.

Now it came to pass, when the wall was built, and I had set up the doors, and the porters and the singers and the Levites were appointed,
that I gave my brother Hanani, and Hananiah the governor of the castle, charge over Jerusalem, for he was a faithful man, and feared God above many.
And I said to them, Let not the gates of Jerusalem be opened until the sun be hot, and while they stand on guard, let them shut the doors, and bar ye them. And appoint watchmen of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, everyone in his watch, and everyone to be opposite his house.
Now the city was wide and large, but the people in it were few, and the houses were not built.
These are the sons of the province who went up out of the captivity of those who had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away, and who returned to Jerusalem and to Judah, everyone to his city,
the sons of Parosh, two thousand a hundred and seventy-two;
the sons of Shephatiah, three hundred seventy and two;
the sons of Arah, six hundred fifty-two;
the sons of Pahath-moab, of the sons of Jeshua and Joab, two thousand and eight hundred and eighteen;
the sons of Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-four;
the sons of Zattu, eight hundred forty-five;
the sons of Zaccai, seven hundred and sixty;
the sons of Binnui, six hundred forty-eight;
the sons of Bebai, six hundred twenty-eight;
the sons of Azgad, two thousand three hundred twenty-two;
the sons of Adonikam, six hundred sixty-seven;
the sons of Bigvai, two thousand sixty-seven;
the sons of Adin, six hundred fifty-five;
the sons of Ater, of Hezekiah, ninety-eight;
the sons of Hashum, three hundred twenty-eight;
the sons of Bezai, three hundred twenty-four;
the sons of Hariph, a hundred and twelve;
the sons of Gibeon, ninety-five;
the men of Bethlehem and Netophah, a hundred eighty-eight;
the men of Anathoth, a hundred twenty-eight;
the men of Beth-azmaveth, forty-two;
the men of Kiriath-jearim, Chephirah, and Beeroth, seven hundred forty-three;
the men of Ramah and Geba, six hundred twenty-one;
the men of Michmas, a hundred and twenty-two;
the men of Bethel and Ai, a hundred twenty-three;
the men of the other Nebo, fifty-two;
the sons of the other Elam, a thousand two hundred fifty-four;
the sons of Harim, three hundred and twenty;
the sons of Jericho, three hundred forty-five;
the sons of Lod, Hadid, and Ono, seven hundred twenty-one;
the sons of Senaah, three thousand nine hundred and thirty.
the sons of Jedaiah, of the house of Jeshua, nine hundred seventy-three;
the sons of Immer, a thousand fifty-two;
the sons of Pashhur, a thousand two hundred forty-seven;
the sons of Harim, a thousand and seventeen.
the sons of Jeshua, of Kadmiel, of the sons of Hodevah, seventy-four.
the sons of Asaph, a hundred forty-eight.
the sons of Shallum, the sons of Ater, the sons of Talmon, the sons of Akkub, the sons of Hatita, the sons of Shobai, a hundred thirty-eight.
the sons of Ziha, the sons of Hasupha, the sons of Tabbaoth,
the sons of Keros, the sons of Sia, the sons of Padon,
the sons of Lebana, the sons of Hagaba, the sons of Salmai,
the sons of Hanan, the sons of Giddel, the sons of Gahar,
the sons of Reaiah, the sons of Rezin, the sons of Nekoda,
the sons of Gazzam, the sons of Uzza, the sons of Paseah.
The sons of Besai, the sons of Meunim, the sons of Nephushesim,
the sons of Bakbuk, the sons of Hakupha, the sons of Harhur,
the sons of Bazlith, the sons of Mehida, the sons of Harsha,
the sons of Barkos, the sons of Sisera, the sons of Temah,
the sons of Neziah, the sons of Hatipha.
the sons of Sotai, the sons of Sophereth, the sons of Perida,
the sons of Jaala, the sons of Darkon, the sons of Giddel,
the sons of Shephatiah, the sons of Hattil, the sons of Pochereth-hazzebaim, the sons of Amon.
All the Nethinim and the sons of Solomon's servants, were three hundred ninety-two.
The sons of Delaiah, the sons of Tobiah, the sons of Nekoda, six hundred forty-two.
the sons of Hobaiah, the sons of Hakkoz, the sons of Barzillai, who took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was called after their name.
These sought their registration among those who were reckoned by genealogy, but it was not found. Therefore they were deemed polluted and put from the priesthood.
And the governor said to them that they should not eat of the most holy things till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim.
The whole assembly together was forty-two thousand three hundred and sixty,
besides their men-servants and their maid-servants, of whom there were seven thousand three hundred thirty-seven. And they had two hundred forty-five singing men and singing women.
Their horses were seven hundred thirty-six, their mules, two hundred forty-five,
their camels, four hundred thirty-five, their donkeys, six thousand seven hundred and twenty.
And some from among the heads of fathers gave to the work. The governor gave to the treasury a thousand darics of gold, fifty basins, five hundred and thirty priests' garments.
And some of the heads of fathers gave into the treasury of the work twenty thousand darics of gold, and two thousand and two hundred pounds of silver.
And that which the rest of the people gave was twenty thousand darics of gold, and two thousand pounds of silver, and sixty-seven priests' garments.
So the priests, and the Levites, and the porters, and the singers, and some of the people, and the Nethinim, and all Israel, dwelt in their cities. And when the seventh month came, the sons of Israel were in their cities.

And all the people gathered themselves together as one man into the broad place that was before the water gate. And they spoke to Ezra the scribe to bring the book of the law of Moses, which Jehovah had commanded to Israel.
And Ezra the priest brought the law before the assembly, both men and women, and all who could hear with understanding, upon the first day of the seventh month.
And he read in it before the broad place that was before the water gate from early morning until midday, in the presence of the men and the women, and of those who could understand. And the ears of all the people were attentive to the book of the law.
And Ezra the scribe stood upon a pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose. And beside him stood Mattithiah, and Shema, and Anaiah, and Uriah, and Hilkiah, and Maaseiah, on his right hand, and on his left hand, Pedaiah, and Mishael, and Malchijah, and Hashum, and Hashbaddanah, Zechariah, and Meshullam.
And Ezra opened the book in the sight of all the people (for he was above all the people), and when he opened it, all the people stood up.
And Ezra blessed Jehovah, the great God. And all the people answered, Truly, Truly, with the lifting up of their hands. And they bowed their heads, and worshiped Jehovah with their faces to the ground.
Also Jeshua, and Bani, and Sherebiah, Jamin, Akkub, Shabbethai, Hodiah, Maaseiah, Kelita, Azariah, Jozabad, Hanan, Pelaiah, and the Levites, caused the people to understand the law. And the people stood in their place.
And they read in the book, in the law of God, distinctly, and they gave the sense, so that they understood the reading.
And Nehemiah, who was the governor, and Ezra the priest the scribe, and the Levites who taught the people, said to all the people, This day is holy to Jehovah your God; do not mourn nor weep. For all the people wept when they heard the words of the law.
Then he said to them, Go your way, eat fat things, and drink sweet things, and send portions to him for whom nothing is prepared. For this day is holy to our Lord; neither be ye grieved, for the joy of Jehovah is your strength.
So the Levites quieted all the people, saying, Be silent, for the day is holy, neither be ye grieved.
And all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and to make great mirth, because they had understood the words that were declared to them.
And on the second day were gathered together the heads of fathers of all the people, the priests, and the Levites, to Ezra the scribe, even to give attention to the words of the law.
And they found written in the law how that Jehovah had commanded by Moses that the sons of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh month,
and that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities, and in Jerusalem, saying, Go forth to the mount, and fetch olive branches, and branches of wild olive, and myrtle branches, and palm branches, and branches of thick trees, to make booths, as it is written.
So the people went forth, and brought them, and made themselves booths, each one upon the roof of his house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of God, and in the broad place of the water gate, and in the broad place of the gate of Ephraim.
And all the assembly of those who came again out of the captivity made booths, and dwelt in the booths, for since the days of Jeshua the son of Nun to that day the sons of Israel had not done so. And there was very great gladness.
Also day by day, from the first day to the last day, he read in the book of the law of God. And they kept the feast seven days, and on the eighth day was a solemn assembly according to the ordinance.

Now in the twenty-fourth day of this month the sons of Israel were assembled with fasting, and with sackcloth, and earth upon them.
And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all foreigners, and stood and confessed their sins, and the iniquities of their fathers.
And they stood up in their place, and read in the book of the law of Jehovah their God a fourth part of the day, and another fourth part they confessed, and worshiped Jehovah their God.
Then Jeshua, and Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, Bunni, Sherebiah, Bani, and Chenani, stood up upon the stairs of the Levites, and cried with a loud voice to Jehovah their God.
Then the Levites, Jeshua, and Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah, Shebaniah, and Pethahiah, said, Stand up and bless Jehovah your God from everlasting to everlasting. And blessed be thy glorious name, which is exalted above all blessing and praise.
Thou are Jehovah, even thou alone, thou have made heaven, the heaven of heavens, with all their host, the earth and all things that are on it, the seas and all that is in them, and thou preserve them all. And the host of heaven worships thee.
Thou are Jehovah, the God who chose Abram, and brought him forth out of Ur of the Chaldees, and gave him the name of Abraham,
and found his heart faithful before thee, and made a covenant with him to give the land of the Canaanite, the Hittite, the Amorite, and the Perizzite, and the Jebusite, and the Girgashite, to give it to his seed, and have performed thy words, for thou are righteous.
And thou saw the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and heard their cry by the Red Sea,
and showed signs and wonders upon Pharaoh, and on all his servants, and on all the people of his land, for thou knew that they dealt proudly against them, and got thee a name, as it is this day.
And thou divided the sea before them, so that they went through the midst of the sea on the dry land. And thou cast their pursuers into the depths as a stone into the mighty waters.
Moreover in a pillar of cloud thou led them by day, and in a pillar of fire by night, to give them light in the way in which they should go.
Thou also came down upon mount Sinai, and spoke with them from heaven, and gave them right ordinances and true laws, good statutes and commandments,
and made known to them thy holy sabbath, and commanded them commandments, and statutes, and a law, by Moses thy servant.
And thou gave them bread from heaven for their hunger, and brought forth water for them out of the rock for their thirst, and commanded them that they should go in to possess the land which thou had sworn to give them.
But they and our fathers dealt proudly and stiffened their neck, and did not hearken to thy commandments,
and refused to obey, neither were mindful of thy wonders that thou did among them, but stiffened their neck. And in their rebellion they appointed a captain to return to their bondage. But thou are a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in loving kindness, and did not forsake them.
Yea, when they had made a molten calf for them, and said, This is thy God that brought thee up out of Egypt, and had wrought great provocations,
yet thou in thy manifold mercies did not forsake them in the wilderness. The pillar of cloud did not depart from over them by day to lead them in the way, neither the pillar of fire by night to show them light, and the way in which they should go.
Thou also gave thy good Spirit to instruct them, and did not withhold thy manna from their mouth, and gave them water for their thirst.
Yea, forty years thou sustained them in the wilderness, and they lacked nothing; their clothes did not grow old, and their feet did not swell.
Moreover thou gave them kingdoms and peoples, which thou allotted after their portions. So they possessed the land of Sihon, even the land of the king of Heshbon, and the land of Og king of Bashan.
Their sons thou also multiplied as the stars of heaven, and brought them into the land concerning which thou said to their fathers that they should go in to possess it.
So the sons went in and possessed the land. And thou subdued the inhabitants of the land before them, the Canaanites, and gave them into their hands, with their kings, and the peoples of the land, that they might do with them as they would.
And they took fortified cities, and a fat land, and possessed houses full of all good things, cisterns hewn out, vineyards, and oliveyards, and fruit trees in abundance. So they ate, and were filled, and became fat, and delighted themselves in thy great goodness.
Nevertheless they were disobedient, and rebelled against thee, and cast thy law behind their back, and killed thy prophets who testified against them to turn them again to thee, and they wrought great provocations.
Therefore thou delivered them into the hand of their adversaries, who distressed them. And in the time of their trouble, when they cried to thee, thou heard from heaven, and according to thy manifold mercies thou gave them saviors who saved them out of the hand of their adversaries.
But after they had rest, they again did evil before thee. Therefore thou left them in the hand of their enemies, so that they had the dominion over them. Yet when they returned, and cried to thee, thou heard from heaven, and many times thou delivered them according to thy mercies,
and testified against them, that thou might bring them again to thy law. Yet they dealt proudly, and did not hearken to thy commandments, but sinned against thine ordinances (which if a man does, he shall live in them), and withdrew the shoulder, and stiffened their neck, and would not hear.
Yet many years thou bore with them, and testified against them by thy Spirit through thy prophets. Yet they would not give ear. Therefore thou gave them into the hand of the peoples of the lands.
Nevertheless in thy manifold mercies thou did not make a full end of them, nor forsake them, for thou are a gracious and merciful God.
Now therefore, our God, the great, the mighty, and the awesome God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness, let not all the travail seem little before thee, that has come upon us, on our kings, on our rulers, and on our priests, and on our prophets, and on our fathers, and on all thy people, since the time of the kings of Assyria to this day.
However thou are just in all that has come upon us, for thou have dealt truly, but we have done wickedly,
neither have our kings, our rulers, our priests, nor our fathers, kept thy law, nor hearkened to thy commandments and thy testimonies with which thou testified against them.
For they have not served thee in their kingdom, and in thy great goodness that thou gave them, and in the large and fat land which thou gave before them, neither did they turn from their wicked works.
Behold, we are servants this day, and as for the land that thou gave to our fathers to eat the fruit of it and the good of it, behold, we are servants in it.
And it yields much increase to the kings whom thou have set over us because of our sins. Also they have power over our bodies, and over our cattle, at their pleasure, and we are in great distress.
And yet for all this we make a sure covenant, and write it, and our rulers, our Levites, and our priests, seal to it.

Nehemiah the governor, the son of Hacaliah, and Zedekiah,
Seraiah, Azariah, Jeremiah,
Pashhur, Amariah, Malchijah,
Hattush, Shebaniah, Malluch,
Harim, Meremoth, Obadiah,
Daniel, Ginnethon, Baruch,
Meshullam, Abijah, Mijamin,
Maaziah, Bilgai, Shemaiah. These were the priests.
namely, Jeshua the son of Azaniah, Binnui of the sons of Henadad, Kadmiel,
and their brothers, Shebaniah, Hodiah, Kelita, Pelaiah, Hanan,
Mica, Rehob, Hashabiah,
Zaccur, Sherebiah, Shebaniah,
Hodiah, Bani, Beninu.
Parosh, Pahath-moab, Elam, Zattu, Bani,
Bunni, Azgad, Bebai,
Adonijah, Bigvai, Adin,
Ater, Hezekiah, Azzur,
Hodiah, Hashum, Bezai,
Hariph, Anathoth, Nobai,
Magpiash, Meshullam, Hezir,
Meshezabel, Zadok, Jaddua,
Pelatiah, Hanan, Anaiah,
Hoshea, Hananiah, Hasshub,
Hallohesh, Pilha, Shobek,
Rehum, Hashabnah, Maaseiah,
and Ahiah, Hanan, Anan,
Malluch, Harim, Baanah.
And the rest of the people-the priests, the Levites, the porters, the singers, the Nethinim, and all those who had separated themselves from the peoples of the lands to the law of God, their wives, their sons, and their daughters, everyone who had knowledge and understanding-
they clung to their brothers, their ranking men, and entered into a curse, and into an oath, to walk in God's law, which was given by Moses the servant of God, and to observe and do all the commandments of Jehovah our Lord, and his ordinances and his statutes.
And that we would not give our daughters to the peoples of the land, nor take their daughters for our sons.
And if the peoples of the land bring wares or any grain on the sabbath day to sell, that we would not buy from them on the sabbath, or on a holy day. And that we would forego the seventh year, and the exaction of every debt.
Also we made ordinances for us, to charge ourselves yearly with the third part of a shekel for the service of the house of our God,
for the showbread, and for the continual meal offering, and for the continual burnt offering, for the sabbaths, for the new moons, for the set feasts, and for the holy things, and for the sin offerings to make atonement for Israel, and for all the work of the house of our God.
And we cast lots, the priests, the Levites, and the people, for the wood offering, to bring it into the house of our God, according to our fathers' houses, at times appointed, year by year, to burn upon the altar of Jehovah our God, as it is written in the law,
and to bring the first-fruits of our ground, and the first-fruits of all fruit of all manner of trees, year by year, to the house of Jehovah,
also the firstborn of our sons, and of our cattle, as it is written in the law, and the firstlings of our herds and of our flocks, to bring to the house of our God, to the priests who minister in the house of our God,
and that we should bring the first-fruits of our dough, and our heave offerings, and the fruit of all manner of trees, the new wine and the oil, to the priests, to the chambers of the house of our God, and the tithes of our ground to the Levites, for they, the Levites, take the tithes in all the cities of our tillage.
And the priest the son of Aaron shall be with the Levites when the Levites take tithes. And the Levites shall bring up the tithe of the tithes to the house of our God, to the chambers, into the treasure-house.
For the sons of Israel and the sons of Levi shall bring the heave offering of the grain, of the new wine, and of the oil, to the chambers, where are the vessels of the sanctuary, and the priests that minister, and the porters, and the singers. And we will not forsake the house of our God.

And the rulers of the people dwelt in Jerusalem. The rest of the people also cast lots to bring one of ten to dwell in Jerusalem the holy city, and nine parts in the other cities.
And the people blessed all the men who willingly offered themselves to dwell in Jerusalem.
Now these are the chiefs of the province who dwelt in Jerusalem. But in the cities of Judah everyone dwells in his possession in their cities, namely, Israel, the priests, and the Levites, and the Nethinim, and the sons of Solomon's servants.
Athaiah the son of Uzziah, the son of Zechariah, the son of Amariah, the son of Shephatiah, the son of Mahalalel, of the sons of Perez;
and Maaseiah the son of Baruch, the son of Col-hozeh, the son of Hazaiah, the son of Adaiah, the son of Joiarib, the son of Zechariah, the son of the Shilonite.
All the sons of Perez who dwelt in Jerusalem were four hundred sixty-eight valiant men.
Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Joed, the son of Pedaiah, the son of Kolaiah, the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ithiel, the son of Jeshaiah.
And after him Gabbai, Sallai, nine hundred twenty-eight.
And Joel the son of Zichri was their overseer, and Judah the son of Hassenuah was second over the city.
Jedaiah the son of Joiarib, Jachin,
Seraiah the son of Hilkiah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God,
and their brothers who did the work of the house, eight hundred twenty-two; and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pelaliah, the son of Amzi, the son of Zechariah, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah,
and his brothers, chiefs of fathers, two hundred forty-two; and Amashsai the son of Azarel, the son of Ahzai, the son of Meshillemoth, the son of Immer,
and their brothers, mighty men of valor, a hundred twenty-eight, and their overseer was Zabdiel, the son of Haggedolim.
Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Bunni,
and Shabbethai and Jozabad of the chiefs of the Levites who had the oversight of the outward business of the house of God,
and Mattaniah the son of Mica, the son of Zabdi, the son of Asaph, who was the chief to begin the thanksgiving in prayer, and Bakbukiah, the second among his brothers, and Abda the son of Shammua, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun.
All the Levites in the holy city were two hundred eighty-four.
Moreover the porters, Akkub, Talmon, and their brothers, who kept watch at the gates, were a hundred seventy-two.
And the rest of Israel, of the priests, the Levites, were in all the cities of Judah, everyone in his inheritance.
But the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel. And Ziha and Gishpa were over the Nethinim.
The overseer also of the Levites at Jerusalem was Uzzi the son of Bani, the son of Hashabiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Mica, of the sons of Asaph, the singers, over the business of the house of God.
For there was a commandment from the king concerning them, and a settled provision for the singers, as every day required.
And Pethahiah the son of Meshezabel, of the sons of Zerah the son of Judah, was at the king's hand in all matters concerning the people.
And as for the villages, with their fields, some of the sons of Judah dwelt in Kiriath-arba and the towns of it, and in Dibon and the towns of it, and in Jekabzeel and the villages of it,
and in Jeshua, and in Moladah, and Beth-pelet,
and in Hazar-shual, and in Beersheba and the towns of it,
and in Ziklag, and in Meconah and in the towns of it,
and in En-rimmon, and in Zorah, and in Jarmuth,
Zanoah, Adullam, and their villages, Lachish and the fields of it, Azekah and the towns of it. So they encamped from Beersheba to the valley of Hinnom.
The sons of Benjamin also dwelt from Geba onward, at Michmash and Aija, and at Bethel and the towns of it,
at Anathoth, Nob, Ananiah,
Hazor, Ramah, Gittaim,
Hadid, Zeboim, Neballat,
Lod, and Ono, the valley of craftsmen.
And of the Levites, certain courses in Judah were joined to Benjamin.

Seraiah, Jeremiah, Ezra,
Amariah, Malluch, Hattush,
Shecaniah, Rehum, Meremoth,
Iddo, Ginnethoi, Abijah,
Mijamin, Maadiah, Bilgah,
Shemaiah, and Joiarib, Jedaiah.
Sallu, Amok, Hilkiah, Jedaiah. These were the chiefs of the priests and of their brothers in the days of Jeshua.
Jeshua, Binnui, Kadmiel, Sherebiah, Judah, and Mattaniah, who was over the thanksgiving, he and his brothers.
Also Bakbukiah and Unno, their brothers, were opposite them according to their offices.
And Jeshua begot Joiakim, and Joiakim begot Eliashib, and Eliashib begot Joiada,
and Joiada begot Jonathan, and Jonathan begot Jaddua.
of Seraiah, Meraiah, of Jeremiah, Hananiah,
of Ezra, Meshullam, of Amariah, Jehohanan,
of Malluchi, Jonathan, of Shebaniah, Joseph,
of Harim, Adna, of Meraioth, Helkai,
of Iddo, Zechariah, of Ginnethon, Meshullam,
of Abijah, Zichri, of Miniamin, of Moadiah, Piltai,
of Bilgah, Shammua, of Shemaiah, Jehonathan,
and of Joiarib, Mattenai, of Jedaiah, Uzzi,
of Sallai, Kallai, of Amok, Eber,
of Hilkiah, Hashabiah, of Jedaiah, Nethanel.
As for the Levites, in the days of Eliashib, Joiada, and Johanan, and Jaddua, there were recorded the heads of fathers, also the priests, in the reign of Darius the Persian.
The sons of Levi, heads of fathers, were written in the book of the chronicles, even until the days of Johanan the son of Eliashib.
Hashabiah, Sherebiah, and Jeshua the son of Kadmiel, with their brothers opposite them, to praise and give thanks, according to the commandment of David the man of God, watch next to watch.
Mattaniah, and Bakbukiah, Obadiah, Meshullam, Talmon, Akkub, were porters keeping the watch at the store-houses of the gates.
These were in the days of Joiakim the son of Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and in the days of Nehemiah the governor, and of Ezra the priest the scribe.
And at the dedication of the wall of Jerusalem they sought the Levites out of all their places, to bring them to Jerusalem to keep the dedication with gladness, both with thanksgivings, and with singing, with cymbals, psalteries, and with harps.
And the sons of the singers gathered themselves together, both out of the plain round about Jerusalem, and from the villages of the Netophathites,
also from Beth-gilgal, and out of the fields of Geba and Azmaveth; for the singers had built for them villages round about Jerusalem.
And the priests and the Levites purified themselves, and they purified the people, and the gates, and the wall.
Then I brought up the rulers of Judah upon the wall, and appointed two great companies that gave thanks and went in procession, one went on the right hand upon the wall toward the dung gate,
and after them went Hoshaiah, and half of the rulers of Judah,
and Azariah, Ezra, and Meshullam,
Judah, and Benjamin, and Shemaiah, and Jeremiah,
Zechariah the son of Jonathan, the son of Shemaiah, the son of Mattaniah, the son of Micaiah, the son of Zaccur, the son of Asaph,
and his brothers, Shemaiah, and Azarel, Milalai, Gilalai, Maai, Nethanel, and Judah, Hanani, with the musical instruments of David the man of God, and Ezra the scribe was ahead of them.
And by the fountain gate, and straight before them, they went up by the stairs of the city of David, at the ascent of the wall, above the house of David, even to the water gate eastward.
And the other company of those who gave thanks went to meet them, and I after them, with the half of the people, upon the wall, above the tower of the furnaces, even to the broad wall,
and above the gate of Ephraim, and by the old gate, and by the fish gate, and the tower of Hananel, and the tower of Hammeah, even to the sheep gate. And they stood still in the gate of the guard.
So stood the two companies of those who gave thanks in the house of God, and I, and the half of the rulers with me,
and the priests, Eliakim, Maaseiah, Miniamin, Micaiah, Elioenai, Zechariah, and Hananiah, with trumpets,
and Maaseiah, and Shemaiah, and Eleazar, and Uzzi, and Jehohanan, and Malchijah, and Elam, and Ezer. And the singers sang loud, with Jezrahiah their overseer.
And they offered great sacrifices that day, and rejoiced, for God had made them rejoice with great joy. And the women also and the children rejoiced, so that the joy of Jerusalem was heard even afar off.
And on that day men were appointed over the chambers for the treasures, for the heave offerings, for the first-fruits, and for the tithes, to gather into them, according to the fields of the cities, the portions appointed by the law for the priests and Levites. For Judah rejoiced for the priests and for the Levites who served.
And they kept the charge of their God, and the charge of the purification, and also the singers and the porters, according to the commandment of David, and of Solomon his son.
For in the days of David and Asaph of old there was a chief of the singers, and songs of praise and thanksgiving to God.
And all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of Nehemiah, gave the portions of the singers and the porters as every day required. And they set apart that which was for the Levites, and the Levites set apart that which was for the sons of Aaron.

On that day they read in the book of Moses in the audience of the people, and in it was found written that an Ammonite and a Moabite should not enter into the assembly of God forever,
because they did not meet the sons of Israel with bread and with water, but hired Balaam against them, to curse them. However our God turned the curse into a blessing.
And it came to pass, when they had heard the law, that they separated from Israel all the mixed multitude.
Now before this, Eliashib the priest, who was appointed over the chambers of the house of our God, being allied to Tobiah,
had prepared for him a great chamber, where formerly they laid the meal offerings, the frankincense, and the vessels, and the tithes of the grain, the new wine, and the oil, which were given by commandment to the Levites, and the singers, and the porters, and the heave offerings for the priests.
But in all this time I was not at Jerusalem, for in the thirty-second year of Artaxerxes king of Babylon I went to the king. And after certain days I asked leave of the king,
and I came to Jerusalem, and understood the evil that Eliashib had done for Tobiah, in preparing him a chamber in the courts of the house of God.
And it grieved me greatly. Therefore I cast forth all the household stuff of Tobiah out of the chamber.
Then I commanded, and they cleansed the chambers. And there I brought again the vessels of the house of God, with the meal offerings and the frankincense.
And I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given them, so that the Levites and the singers, who did the work, had fled each one to his field.
Then I contended with the rulers, and said, Why is the house of God forsaken? And I gathered them together, and set them in their place.
Then all Judah brought the tithe of the grain and the new wine and the oil to the treasuries.
And I made treasurers over the treasuries, Shelemiah the priest, and Zadok the scribe, and of the Levites, Pedaiah, and next to them was Hanan the son of Zaccur, the son of Mattaniah. For they were counted faithful, and their business was to distribute to their brothers.
Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and do not wipe out my good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the observances of it.
In those days I saw in Judah some men treading wine-presses on the sabbath, and bringing in sheaves, and loading donkeys therewith, as also wine, grapes, and figs, and all manner of burdens, which they brought into Jerusalem on the sabbath day. And I testified against them in the day in which they sold foods.
There dwelt men of Tyre also in it who brought in fish, and all manner of wares, and sold on the sabbath to the sons of Judah, and in Jerusalem.
Then I contended with the ranking men of Judah, and said to them, What evil thing is this that ye do, and profane the sabbath day?
Did not your fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this evil upon us, and upon this city? Yet ye bring more wrath upon Israel by profaning the sabbath.
And it came to pass that, when the gates of Jerusalem began to be dark before the sabbath, I commanded that the doors should be shut, and commanded that they should not be opened till after the sabbath. And I set some of my servants over the gates that there should be no burden brought in on the sabbath day.
So the merchants and sellers of all kind of wares lodged outside Jerusalem once or twice.
Then I testified against them, and said to them, Why do ye lodge outside the wall? If ye do so again, I will lay hands on you. From that time forth they came no more on the sabbath.
And I commanded the Levites that they should purify themselves, and that they should come and keep the gates, to sanctify the sabbath day. Remember to me, O my God, this also, and spare me according to the greatness of thy loving kindness.
In those days also I saw the Jews who had married women of Ashdod, of Ammon, and of Moab.
And their sons spoke half in the speech of Ashdod, and could not speak in the Jews' language, but according to the language of each people.
And I contended with them, and cursed them, and smote certain of them, and plucked off their hair, and made them swear by God, saying, Ye shall not give your daughters to their sons, nor take their daughters for your sons, or for yourselves.
Did not Solomon king of Israel sin by these things? Yet there was no king like him among many nations, and he was beloved of his God, and God made him king over all Israel. Nevertheless foreign women caused even him to sin.
Shall we then hearken to you to do all this great evil, to trespass against our God in marrying foreign women?
And one of the sons of Joiada, the son of Eliashib the high priest, was son-in-law to Sanballat the Horonite. Therefore I chased him from me.
Remember them, O my God, because they have defiled the priesthood, and the covenant of the priesthood, and of the Levites.
Thus I cleansed them from all foreigners, and appointed charges for the priests and for the Levites, each one in his work,
and for the wood offering, at times appointed, and for the first-fruits. Remember me, O my God, for good.

Esther

Now it came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus (this is Ahasuerus who reigned from India even to Ethiopia over a hundred and twenty-seven provinces),
that in those days, when king Ahasuerus sat on the throne of his kingdom, which was in Shushan the palace,
in the third year of his reign, he made a feast to all his rulers and his servants, the power of Persia and Media, the ranking men and rulers of the provinces, being before him
when he showed the riches of his glorious kingdom and the honor of his excellent majesty many days, even a hundred and eighty days.
And when these days were fulfilled, the king made a feast to all the people who were present in Shushan the palace, both great and small, seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's palace.
There were hangings of white cloth, of green, and of blue, fastened with cords of fine linen and purple to silver rings and pillars of marble. The couches were of gold and silver, upon a pavement of red and white and yellow and black marble.
And they gave them drink in vessels of gold (the vessels being diverse one from another), and royal wine in abundance according to the bounty of the king.
And the drinking was according to the law, none could compel. For so the king had appointed to all the officers of his house, that they should do according to every man's pleasure.
Also Vashti the queen made a feast for the women in the royal house which belonged to king Ahasuerus.
On the seventh day, when the heart of the king was merry with wine, he commanded Mehuman, Biztha, Harbona, Bigtha, and Abagtha, Zethar, and Carcas, the seven chamberlains who ministered in the presence of Ahasuerus the king,
to bring Vashti the queen before the king with the royal crown to show the peoples and the rulers her beauty, for she was fair to look on.
But the queen Vashti refused to come at the king's commandment by the chamberlains. Therefore the king was very angry, and his fury burned in him.
Then the king said to the wise men who knew the times (for so was the king's manner toward all who knew law and judgment,
and next to him were Carshena, Shethar, Admatha, Tarshish, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, the seven rulers of Persia and Media who saw the king's face, and sat first in the kingdom),
What shall we do to queen Vashti according to law, because she has not done the bidding of king Ahasuerus by the chamberlains?
And Memucan answered before the king and the rulers, Vashti the queen has not done wrong only to the king, but also to all the rulers, and to all the peoples that are in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus.
For this deed of the queen will come abroad to all women, to make their husbands contemptible in their eyes when it shall be reported, King Ahasuerus commanded Vashti the queen to be brought in before him, but she did not come.
And this day the ladies of Persia and Media who have heard of the deed of the queen will say the like to all the king's rulers. So there will arise much contempt and wrath.
If it please the king, let there go forth a royal commandment from him, and let it be written among the laws of the Persians and the Medes, that it be not altered, that Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus, and let the king give her royal estate to another who is better than she.
And when the king's decree which he shall make shall be published throughout all his kingdom (for it is great), all the wives will give to their husbands honor, both to great and small.
And the saying pleased the king and the rulers, and the king did according to the word of Memucan.
For he sent letters into all the king's provinces, into every province according to the writing of it, and to every people after their language, that every man should bear rule in his own house, and should speak according to the language of his people.

After these things, when the wrath of king Ahasuerus was pacified, he remembered Vashti, and what she had done, and what was decreed against her.
Then the king's servants who ministered to him said, Let there be fair young virgins sought for the king.
And let the king appoint officers in all the provinces of his kingdom, that they may gather together all the fair young virgins to Shushan the palace, to the house of the women, to the custody of Hegai the king's chamberlain, keeper of the women. And let their things for purification be given them,
and let the maiden who pleases the king be queen instead of Vashti. And the thing pleased the king, and he did so.
There was a certain Jew in Shushan the palace whose name was Mordecai, the son of Jair, the son of Shimei, the son of Kish, a Benjamite,
who had been carried away from Jerusalem with the captives who had been carried away with Jeconiah king of Judah, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away.
And he brought up Hadassah, that is, Esther, his uncle's daughter. For she had neither father nor mother, and the maiden was fair and beautiful. And when her father and mother were dead, Mordecai took her for his own daughter.
So it came to pass, when the king's commandment and his decree was heard, and when many maidens were gathered together to Shushan the palace to the custody of Hegai, that Esther was taken into the king's house to the custody of Hegai, keeper of the women.
And the maiden pleased him, and she obtained kindness from him. And he quickly gave her things for purification, with her portions, and the seven maidens who were suitable to be given her out of the king's house. And he removed her and her maidens to the best place of the house of the women.
Esther had not made known her people nor her kindred, for Mordecai had charged her that she should not make it known.
And Mordecai walked every day before the court of the women's house to know how Esther did, and what would become of her.
Now when the turn of every maiden came to go in to king Ahasuerus, after it had been done to her according to the law for the women twelve months (for so were the days of their purifications accomplished, namely, six months with oil of myrrh, and six months with sweet odors and with the things for the purifying of the women),
Whatever she desired was given her to go with her out of the house of the women to the king's house.
In the evening she went, and on the morrow she returned into the second house of the women to the custody of Shaashgaz, the king's chamberlain, who kept the concubines. She came in to the king no more unless the king delighted in her, and she was called by name.
Now when the turn of Esther, the daughter of Abihail the uncle of Mordecai, who had taken her for his daughter, came to go in to the king, she required nothing but what Hegai the king's chamberlain, the keeper of the women, appointed. And Esther obtained favor in the sight of all those who looked upon her.
So Esther was taken to king Ahasuerus into his royal house in the tenth month, which is the month Tebeth, in the seventh year of his reign.
And the king loved Esther above all the women. And she obtained favor and kindness in his sight more than all the virgins, so that he set the royal crown upon her head, and made her queen instead of Vashti.
Then the king made a great feast to all his rulers and his servants, even Esther's feast, and he made a release to the provinces, and gave gifts according to the bounty of the king.
And when the virgins were gathered together the second time, then Mordecai was sitting in the king's gate.
Esther had not yet made known her kindred nor her people, as Mordecai had charged her. For Esther did the commandment of Mordecai, as when she was brought up with him.
In those days, while Mordecai was sitting in the king's gate, two of the king's chamberlains, Bigthan and Teresh, of those who kept the threshold, were angry, and sought to lay hands on king Ahasuerus.
And the thing became known to Mordecai, who showed it to Esther the queen, and Esther told the king of it in Mordecai's name.
And when inquiry was made of the matter, and it was found to be so, they were both hanged on a tree. And it was written in the book of the chronicles before the king.

After these things king Ahasuerus promoted Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, and advanced him, and set his seat above all the rulers that were with him.
And all the king's servants, who were in the king's gate, bowed down, and did reverence to Haman, for the king had so commanded concerning him. But Mordecai did not bow down, nor do him reverence.
Then the king's servants, who were in the king's gate, said to Mordecai, Why do thou transgress the king's commandment?
Now it came to pass, when they spoke daily to him, and he did not hearken to them, that they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai's matters would stand, for he had told them that he was a Jew.
And when Haman saw that Mordecai did not bow down, nor do him reverence, then Haman was full of wrath.
But he disdained to lay hands on Mordecai alone, for they had made known to him the people of Mordecai. Therefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the whole kingdom of Ahasuerus, even the people of Mordecai.
In the first month, which is the month Nisan, in the twelfth year of king Ahasuerus, they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman from day to day, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.
And Haman said to king Ahasuerus, There is a certain people scattered abroad and dispersed among the peoples in all the provinces of thy kingdom, and their laws are diverse from those of every people, nor do they keep the king's laws. Therefore it is not for the king's profit to endure them.
If it please the king, let it be written that they be destroyed. And I will pay ten thousand talents of silver into the hands of those who have the charge of the king's business, to bring it into the king's treasuries.
And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it to Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy.
And the king said to Haman, The silver is given to thee, the people also, to do with them as it seems good to thee.
Then the king's scribes were called in the first month, on the thirteenth day of it. And there was written according to all that Haman commanded to the king's satraps, and to the governors who were over every province, and to the rulers of every people, to every province according to the writing of it, and to every people after their language, in the name of king Ahasuerus it was written. And it was sealed with the king's ring.
And letters were sent by posts into all the king's provinces, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and old, little sons and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, and to take the spoil of them for a prey.
A copy of the writing that the decree should be given out in every province was published to all the peoples, that they should be ready against that day.
The posts went forth in haste by the king's commandment, and the decree was given out in Shushan the palace. And the king and Haman sat down to drink, but the city of Shushan was perplexed.

Now when Mordecai knew all that was done, Mordecai tore his clothes, and put on sackcloth with ashes, and went out into the midst of the city, and cried with a loud and a bitter cry.
And he came even before the king's gate, for none might enter inside the king's gate clothed with sackcloth.
And in every province, wherever the king's commandment and his decree came, there was great mourning among the Jews, and fasting, and weeping, and wailing, and many lay in sackcloth and ashes.
And Esther's maidens and her chamberlains came and told it to her. And the queen was exceedingly grieved. And she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, and to take his sackcloth from off him, but he did not receive it.
Then Esther called for Hathach, one of the king's chamberlains whom he had appointed to attend upon her, and charged him to go to Mordecai, to know what this was, and why it was.
So Hathach went forth to Mordecai to the broad place of the city, which was before the king's gate.
And Mordecai told him of all that had happened to him, and the exact sum of the money that Haman had promised to pay to the king's treasuries for the Jews to destroy them.
Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was given out in Shushan to destroy them, to show it to Esther, and to declare it to her, and to charge her that she should go in to the king to make supplication to him, and to make request before him for her people.
And Hathach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai.
Then Esther spoke to Hathach, and gave him a message to Mordecai saying,
All the king's servants, and the people of the king's provinces, know, that whoever, whether man or woman, shall come to the king into the inner court, who is not called, there is one law for him, that he be put to death, except those to whom the king shall hold out the golden scepter that he may live. But I have not been called to come in to the king these thirty days.
And they told Esther's words to Mordecai.
Then Mordecai bade them return answer to Esther, Think not with thyself that thou shall escape in the king's house more than all the Jews.
For if thou altogether keep quiet at this time, then relief and deliverance will arise to the Jews from another place, but thou and thy father's house will perish. And who knows whether thou have not come to the kingdom for such a time as this?
Then Esther bade them return answer to Mordecai,
Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan, and fast ye for me, and neither eat nor drink three days, night or day. I also and my maidens will fast in like manner. And so I will go in to the king, which is not according to the law. And if I perish, I perish.
So Mordecai went his way, and did according to all that Esther had commanded him.

Now it came to pass on the third day, that Esther put on her royal apparel, and stood in the inner court of the king's house, opposite the king's house. And the king sat upon his royal throne in the royal house, opposite the entrance of the house.
And it was so, when the king saw Esther the queen standing in the court, that she obtained favor in his sight, and the king held out to Esther the golden scepter that was in his hand. So Esther drew near, and touched the top of the scepter.
Then the king said to her, What will thou, queen Esther? And what is thy request? It shall be given thee even to the half of the kingdom.
And Esther said, If it seems good to the king, let the king and Haman come this day to the banquet that I have prepared for him.
Then the king said, Cause Haman to make haste that it may be done as Esther has said. So the king and Haman came to the banquet that Esther had prepared.
And the king said to Esther at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition? And it shall be granted thee. And what is thy request? Even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.
Then Esther answered, and said, My petition and my request is,
if I have found favor in the sight of the king, and if it please the king to grant my petition, and to perform my request, let the king and Haman come to the banquet that I shall prepare for them, and I will do tomorrow as the king has said.
Then Haman went forth that day joyful and glad of heart. But when Haman saw Mordecai in the king's gate, that he did not stand up nor move for him, he was filled with wrath against Mordecai.
Nevertheless Haman restrained himself, and went home, and he sent and fetched his friends and Zeresh his wife.
And Haman recounted to them the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his sons, and all the things in which the king had promoted him, and how he had advanced him above the rulers and servants of the king.
Haman said moreover, Yea, Esther the queen let no man come in with the king to the banquet that she had prepared but myself, and tomorrow also I am invited by her together with the king.
Yet all this avails me nothing so long as I see Mordecai the Jew sitting at the king's gate.
Then Zeresh his wife and all his friends said to him, Let a gallows be made fifty cubits high, and in the morning speak thou to the king that Mordecai may be hanged on it. Then go thou in merrily with the king to the banquet. And the thing pleased Haman, and he caused the gallows to be made.

On that night the king could not sleep. And he commanded to bring the book of records of the chronicles, and they were read before the king.
And it was found written, that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's chamberlains, of those who kept the threshold, who had sought to lay hands on king Ahasuerus.
And the king said, What honor and dignity has been bestowed on Mordecai for this? Then the king's servants who ministered to him said, There is nothing done for him.
And the king said, Who is in the court? Now Haman came into the outward court of the king's house to speak to the king to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him.
And the king's servants said to him, Behold, Haman stands in the court. And the king said, Let him come in.
So Haman came in. And the king said to him, What shall be done to the man whom the king delights to honor? Now Haman said in his heart, To whom would the king delight to do honor more than to myself?
And Haman said to the king, For the man whom the king delights to honor,
let royal apparel be brought which the king uses to wear, and the horse that the king rides upon, and on the head of which a royal crown is set.
And let the apparel and the horse be delivered to the hand of one of the king's most noble rulers, that they may array the man therewith whom the king delights to honor, and cause him to ride on horseback through the street of the city, and proclaim before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delights to honor.
Then the king said to Haman, Make haste, and take the apparel and the horse, as thou have said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, who sits at the king's gate. Let nothing fail of all that thou have spoken.
Then Haman took the apparel and the horse, and arrayed Mordecai, and caused him to ride through the street of the city, and proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delights to honor.
And Mordecai came again to the king's gate. But Haman hastened to his house, mourning and having his head covered.
And Haman recounted to Zeresh his wife and all his friends everything that had befallen him. Then his wise men and Zeresh his wife said to him, If Mordecai, before whom thou have begun to fall, be of the seed of the Jews, thou shall not prevail against him, but shall surely fall before him.
While they were yet talking with him, the king's chamberlains came, and hastened to bring Haman to the banquet that Esther had prepared.

So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen.
And the king said again to Esther on the second day at the banquet of wine, What is thy petition, queen Esther? And it shall be granted thee. And what is thy request? Even to the half of the kingdom it shall be performed.
Then Esther the queen answered and said, If I have found favor in thy sight, O king, and if it please the king, let my life be given me at my petition, and my people at my request.
For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to perish. But if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I would have held my peace, although the adversary could not have compensated for the king's damage.
Then king Ahasuerus spoke and said to Esther the queen, Who is he, and where is he, who dares presume in his heart to do so?
And Esther said, An adversary and an enemy, even this wicked Haman. Then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen.
And the king arose in his wrath from the banquet of wine and went into the palace garden. And Haman stood up to make request for his life to Esther the queen, for he saw that there was evil determined against him by the king.
Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of the banquet of wine, and Haman was fallen upon the couch on which Esther was. Then the king said, Will he even force the queen before me in the house? As the word went out of the king's mouth, they covered Haman's face.
Then Harbonah, one of the chamberlains who were before the king said, Behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman has made for Mordecai, who spoke good for the king, stands in the house of Haman. And the king said, Hang him on it.
So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for Mordecai. Then the king's wrath was pacified.

On that day king Ahasuerus gave the house of Haman the Jews' enemy to Esther the queen. And Mordecai came before the king, for Esther had told what he was to her.
And the king took off his ring, which he had taken from Haman, and gave it to Mordecai. And Esther set Mordecai over the house of Haman.
And Esther spoke yet again before the king, and fell down at his feet, and besought him with tears to put away the mischief of Haman the Agagite, and his device that he had devised against the Jews.
Then the king held out to Esther the golden scepter. So Esther arose, and stood before the king.
And she said, If it please the king, and if I have found favor in his sight, and the thing seem right before the king, and I be pleasing in his eyes, let it be written to reverse the letters devised by Haman, the son of Hammedatha the Agagite, which he wrote to destroy the Jews that are in all the king's provinces.
For how can I endure to see the evil that shall come to my people? Or how can I endure to see the destruction of my kindred?
Then the king Ahasuerus said to Esther the queen and to Mordecai the Jew, Behold, I have given Esther the house of Haman, and him they have hanged upon the gallows, because he laid his hand upon the Jews.
Write ye also to the Jews, as it pleases you, in the king's name, and seal it with the king's ring, for the writing which is written in the king's name, and sealed with the king's ring, may no man reverse.
Then the king's scribes were called at that time, in the third month Sivan, on the twenty-third day of it. And it was written according to all that Mordecai commanded to the Jews, and to the satraps, and the governors and rulers of the provinces which are from India to Ethiopia, a hundred twenty-seven provinces, to every province according to the writing of it, and to every people after their language, and to the Jews according to their writing, and according to their language.
And he wrote the name of king Ahasuerus, and sealed it with the king's ring, and sent letters by post on horseback, riding on swift steeds that were used in the king's service bred of the stud,
in which the king granted the Jews that were in every city to gather themselves together, and to stand for their life, to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all the power of the people and province who would assault them, their little ones and women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey,
upon one day in all the provinces of king Ahasuerus, namely, upon the thirteenth day of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar.
A copy of the writing, that the decree should be given out in every province, was published to all the peoples, and that the Jews should be ready against that day to avenge themselves on their enemies.
So the posts that rode upon swift steeds that were used in the king's service went out, being hastened and pressed on by the king's commandment, and the decree was given out in Shushan the palace.
And Mordecai went forth from the presence of the king in royal apparel of blue and white, and with a great crown of gold, and with a robe of fine linen and purple. And the city of Shushan shouted and was glad.
The Jews had light and gladness, and joy and honor.
And in every province, and in every city, wherever the king's commandment and his decree came, the Jews had gladness and joy, a feast and a good day. And many from among the peoples of the land became Jews, for the fear of the Jews was fallen upon them.

Now in the twelfth month, which is the month Adar, on the thirteenth day of the same, when the king's commandment and his decree drew near to be put in execution on the day that the enemies of the Jews hoped to have rule over them (whereas it was turned to the contrary, that the Jews had rule over those who hated them),
the Jews gathered themselves together in their cities throughout all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, to lay hand on such as sought their hurt. And no man could withstand them, for the fear of them fell upon all the peoples.
And all the rulers of the provinces, and the satraps, and the governors, and those who did the king's business, helped the Jews, because the fear of Mordecai fell upon them.
For Mordecai was great in the king's house, and his fame went forth throughout all the provinces, for the man Mordecai grew greater and greater.
And the Jews smote all their enemies with the stroke of the sword, and with slaughter and destruction, and did what they would to those who hated them.
And in Shushan the palace the Jews killed and destroyed five hundred men.
And they killed Parshandatha, and Dalphon, and Aspatha,
and Poratha, and Adalia, and Aridatha,
and Parmashta, and Arisai, and Aridai, and Vaizatha,
the ten sons of Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Jew's enemy, but they did not lay their hand on the spoil.
On that day the number of those who were slain in Shushan the palace was brought before the king.
And the king said to Esther the queen, The Jews have slain and destroyed five hundred men in Shushan the palace, and the ten sons of Haman. What then have they done in the rest of the king's provinces! Now what is thy petition? And it shall be granted thee, or what is thy request further? And it shall be done.
Then Esther said, If it please the king, let it be granted to the Jews who are in Shushan to do tomorrow also according to this day's decree, and let Haman's ten sons be hanged upon the gallows.
And the king commanded it so to be done. And a decree was given out in Shushan, and they hanged Haman's ten sons.
And the Jews who were in Shushan gathered themselves together on the fourteenth day also of the month Adar, and killed three hundred men in Shushan, but they did not lay their hand on the spoil.
And the other Jews who were in the king's provinces gathered themselves together, and stood for their lives, and had rest from their enemies, and killed seventy-five thousand of those who hated them. But they did not lay their hand on the spoil.
This was done on the thirteenth day of the month Adar. And on the fourteenth day of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting and gladness.
But the Jews who were in Shushan assembled together on the thirteenth day of it, and on the fourteenth of it, and on the fifteenth day of the same they rested, and made it a day of feasting and gladness.
Therefore the Jews of the villages, who dwell in the unwalled towns, make the fourteenth day of the month Adar a day of gladness and feasting, and a good day, and of sending portions one to another.
And Mordecai wrote these things, and sent letters to all the Jews who were in all the provinces of the king Ahasuerus, both near and far,
to enjoin them that they should keep the fourteenth day of the month Adar, and the fifteenth day of the same, yearly,
as the days in which the Jews had rest from their enemies. And the month which was turned to them from sorrow to gladness, and from mourning into a good day, that they should make them days of feasting and gladness, and of sending portions one to another, and gifts to the poor.
And the Jews undertook to do as they had begun, and as Mordecai had written to them,
because Haman the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, the enemy of all the Jews, had plotted against the Jews to destroy them, and had cast Pur, that is the lot, to consume them, and to destroy them.
But when the matter came before the king, he commanded by letters that his wicked device, which he had devised against the Jews, should return upon his own head, and that he and his sons should be hanged on the gallows.
Therefore they called these days Purim, after the name of Pur. Therefore because of all the words of this letter, and of that which they had seen concerning this matter, and that which had come to them,
the Jews ordained, and took upon them, and upon their seed, and upon all such as joined themselves to them, so that it should not fail, that they would keep these two days according to the writing of it, and according to the appointed time of it, every year.
And that these days should be remembered and kept throughout every generation, every family, every province, and every city, and that these days of Purim should not fail from among the Jews, nor the remembrance of them perish from their seed.
Then Esther the queen, the daughter of Abihail, and Mordecai the Jew, wrote with all authority to confirm this second letter of Purim.
And he sent letters to all the Jews, to the hundred twenty-seven provinces of the kingdom of Ahasuerus, with words of peace and truth,
to confirm these days of Purim in their appointed times, according as Mordecai the Jew and Esther the queen had enjoined them, and as they had ordained for themselves and for their seed in the matter of the fastings and their cry.
And the commandment of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim, and it was written in the book.

And king Ahasuerus laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the isles of the sea.
And all the acts of his power and of his might, and the full account of the greatness of Mordecai, to what the king advanced him, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of Media and Persia?
For Mordecai the Jew was next to king Ahasuerus, and great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brothers, seeking the good of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed.

Job

There was a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job, and that man was perfect and upright, and one who feared God, and turned away from evil.
And there were born to him seven sons and three daughters.
His substance also was seven thousand sheep, and three thousand camels, and five hundred yoke of oxen, and five hundred she-donkeys, and a very great household, so that this man was the greatest of all the sons of the east.
And his sons went and held a feast in the house of each one upon his day, and they sent and called for their three sisters to eat and to drink with them.
And it was so, when the days of their feasting were completed, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning, and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all. For Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned, and renounced God in their hearts. Thus Job did continually.
Now it came to pass on the day when the sons of God came to present themselves before Jehovah, that Satan also came among them.
And Jehovah said to Satan, From where do thou come? Then Satan answered Jehovah, and said, From going to and fro on the earth, and from walking up and down on it.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job? For there is none like him on the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil.
Then Satan answered Jehovah, and said, Does Job fear God for nothing?
Have thou not made a hedge about him, and about his house, and about all that he has, on every side? Thou have blessed the work of his hands, and his substance is increased in the land.
But put forth thy hand now, and touch all that he has, and he will renounce thee to thy face.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Behold, all that he has is in thy power, only upon himself do not put forth thy hand. So Satan went forth from the presence of Jehovah.
And it fell on a day when his sons and his daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house,
that there came a messenger to Job, and said, The oxen were plowing, and the donkeys feeding beside them,
and the Sabeans fell upon them, and took them away. Yea, they have slain the servants with the edge of the sword, and only I alone have escaped to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The fire of God fell from heaven, and has burned up the sheep and the servants, and consumed them, and only I alone have escaped to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, The Chaldeans made three bands, and fell upon the camels, and have taken them away, yea, and slain the servants with the edge of the sword, and only I alone have escaped to tell thee.
While he was yet speaking, there came also another, and said, Thy sons and thy daughters were eating and drinking wine in their eldest brother's house.
And, behold, there came a great wind from the wilderness, and smote the four corners of the house, and it fell upon the young men, and they are dead, and only I alone have escaped to tell thee.
Then Job arose, and tore his robe, and shaved his head, and fell down upon the ground, and worshiped.
And he said, Naked I came out of my mother's womb, and naked I shall return there. Jehovah gave, and Jehovah has taken away, blessed be the name of Jehovah.
In all this Job did not sin, nor foolishly accuse God.

Again it came to pass on the day when the sons of God came to present themselves before Jehovah, that Satan came also among them to present himself before Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to Satan, From where did thou come? And Satan answered Jehovah, and said, From going to and fro on the earth, and from walking up and down on it.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job? For there is none like him in the earth, a perfect and an upright man, one who fears God, and turns away from evil. And he still holds fast his integrity, although thou moved me against him, to destroy him without cause.
And Satan answered Jehovah, and said, Skin for skin, yea, all that a man has he will give for his life.
But put forth thy hand now, and touch his bone and his flesh, and he will renounce thee to thy face.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Behold, he is in thy hand, only spare his life.
So Satan went forth from the presence of Jehovah, and smote Job with severe boils from the sole of his foot to his crown.
And he took a potsherd for him to scrape himself with it, and he sat among the ashes.
Then his wife said to him, Do thou still hold fast thine integrity? Renounce God, and die.
But he said to her, Thou speak as one of the foolish women speaks. What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive evil? In all this Job did not sin with his lips.
Now when Job's three friends heard of all this evil that came upon him, they came each one from his own place-Eliphaz the Temanite, and Bildad the Shuhite, and Zophar the Naamathite-and they made an appointment together to come to bemoan him and to comfort him.
And when they lifted up their eyes afar off, and did not recognize him, they lifted up their voice, and wept. And each one tore his robe, and sprinkled dust upon their heads toward heaven.
So they sat down with him upon the ground seven days and seven nights. And none spoke a word to him, for they saw that his grief was very great.

After this Job opened his mouth, and cursed his day.
And Job answered and said,
Let the day perish in which I was born, and the night which said, There is a man-child conceived.
Let that day be darkness. Let not God from above seek for it, nor let the light shine upon it.
Let darkness and the shadow of death claim it for their own. Let a cloud dwell upon it. Let blackness come upon it.
As for that night, let thick darkness seize upon it. Let it not rejoice among the days of the year. Let it not come into the number of the months.
Lo, let that night be barren. Let no joyful voice come in it.
Let them curse it who curse the day, who are ready to rouse up leviathan.
Let the stars of the twilight of it be dark. Let it look for light, but have none, nor let it behold the eyelids of the morning.
Because it did not shut up the doors of my mother's womb, nor hide trouble from my eyes.
Why did I not die from the womb? Why did I not give up the spirit when my mother bore me?
Why did the knees receive me? Or why the breast, that I should suck?
For now I should have lain down and been quiet. I should have slept. Then I would have been at rest
with kings and counselors of the earth, who built waste places for themselves,
or with rulers who had gold, who filled their houses with silver.
Or I should have been as a hidden untimely birth, as infants that never saw light.
There the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at rest.
There the prisoners are at ease together. They do not hear the voice of the taskmaster.
The small and the great are there. And the servant is free from his master.
Why is light given to him who is in misery, and life to the bitter in soul,
who long for death, but it comes not, and dig for it more than for hid treasures,
who rejoice exceedingly, and are glad when they can find the grave?
Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God has hedged in?
For my sighing comes before I eat, and my groanings are poured out like water.
For the thing which I fear comes upon me, and that which I am afraid of comes to me.
I am not at ease, nor am I quiet, neither have I rest, but trouble comes.

Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, and said,
If a man tries to converse with thee, will thou be grieved? But who can withhold himself from speaking?
Behold, thou have instructed many, and thou have strengthened the weak hands.
Thy words have upheld him who was falling, and thou have made firm the feeble knees.
But now it comes to thee, and thou faint. It touches thee, and thou are troubled.
Is not thy fear of God thy confidence, the integrity of thy ways thy hope?
Remember, I pray thee, who ever perished, being innocent? Or where were the upright cut off?
According as I have seen, those who plow iniquity, and sow trouble, reap the same.
By the breath of God they perish, and by the blast of his anger they are consumed.
The roaring of the lion, and the voice of the fierce lion, and the teeth of the young lions, are broken.
The old lion perishes for lack of prey, and the whelps of the lioness are scattered abroad.
Now a thing was secretly brought to me, and my ear received a whisper of it.
In thoughts from the visions of the night, when deep sleep falls on men,
fear came upon me, and trembling, which made all my bones to shake.
Then a spirit passed before my face; the hair of my flesh stood up.
It stood still, but I could not discern the appearance of it. A form was before my eyes. There was silence, and I heard a voice, saying,
Shall mortal man be more just than God? Shall a man be more pure than his maker?
Behold, he puts no trust in his servants, and he charges his agents with folly.
How much more those who dwell in houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust, who are crushed before the moth!
Between morning and evening they are destroyed. They perish forever without any regarding it.
Is not their tent-cord plucked up within them? They die, and that without wisdom.

Call now, is there any who will answer thee? And to which of the holy ones will thou turn?
For vexation kills the foolish man, and jealousy slays the silly one.
I have seen the foolish taking root, but suddenly I cursed his habitation.
His sons are far from safety, and they are crushed in the gate. Neither is there any to deliver them,
whose harvest the hungry eat up, and takes it even out of the thorns, and the snare gapes for their substance.
For affliction does not come forth from the dust, nor does trouble spring out of the ground,
but man is born to trouble, as the sparks fly upward.
But as for me, I would seek to God. And to God I would commit my cause,
who does great things and unsearchable, marvelous things without number,
who gives rain upon the earth, and sends waters upon the fields,
so that he sets up on high those who are low, and those who mourn are exalted to safety.
He frustrates the devices of the crafty so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise.
He takes the wise in their own craftiness, and the counsel of the cunning is carried headlong.
They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope at noonday as in the night.
But he saves from the sword of their mouth, even the needy from the hand of the mighty.
So a poor man has hope, and iniquity stops her mouth.
Behold, happy is the man whom God corrects. Therefore do not despise thou the chastening of the Almighty.
For he injures, and binds up. He wounds, and his hands make whole.
He will deliver thee in six troubles. Yea, in seven there shall no evil touch thee.
In famine he will redeem thee from death, and in war from the power of the sword.
Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue. Neither shall thou be afraid of destruction when it comes.
At destruction and dearth thou shall laugh, nor shall thou be afraid of the beasts of the earth.
For thou shall be in league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at peace with thee.
And thou shall know that thy tent is in peace, and thou shall visit thy fold, and shall miss nothing.
Thou shall know also that thy seed shall be great, and thine offspring as the grass of the earth.
Thou shall come to thy grave in a full age, like a shock of grain comes in its season.
Lo this, we have searched it, so it is. Hear it, and know thou it for thy good.

Then Job answered and said,
O that my grief were but weighed, and all my calamity laid in the balances!
For now it would be heavier than the sand of the seas. Therefore my words have been rash.
For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison of which my spirit drinks up. The terrors of God set themselves in array against me.
Does the wild donkey bray when he has grass? Or the ox moo over his fodder?
Can that which has no savor be eaten without salt? Or is there any taste in the white of an egg?
My soul refuses to touch them. They are as loathsome food to me.
O that I might have my request, and that God would grant me the thing that I long for!
Even that it would please God to crush me, that he would let loose his hand, and cut me off!
And be it still my consolation, yea, let me exult (in pain that does not spare), that I have not denied the words of the Holy One.
What is my strength that I should wait? And what is my end that I should be patient?
Is my strength the strength of stones? Or is my flesh of brass?
Is it not that I have no help in me, and that wisdom is driven quite from me?
To him who is ready to faint, kindness should be from his friend, even to him who forsakes the fear of the Almighty.
My brothers have dealt deceitfully as a brook, as the channel of brooks that pass away,
which are black because of the ice, in which the snow hides itself.
What time they grow warm, they vanish. When it is hot, they are consumed out of their place.
The caravans that travel by the way of them turn aside. They go up into the waste, and perish.
The caravans of Tema looked, the companies of Sheba waited for them.
They were put to shame because they had hoped. They came there, and were confounded.
For now ye are nothing. Ye see a terror, and are afraid.
Did I say, Give to me? Or, Offer a present for me from your substance?
Or, Deliver me from the adversary's hand? Or, Redeem me from the hand of the oppressors?
Teach me, and I will be quiet. And cause me to understand how I have erred.
How forcible are words of uprightness! But your reproof, what does it reprove?
Do ye think to reprove words, seeing that the speeches of a man who is desperate are as wind?
Yea, ye would cast lots upon the fatherless, and make merchandise of your friend.
Now therefore be pleased to look upon me, for truly I shall not lie to your face.
Return, I pray you, let there be no injustice. Yea, return again, my cause is righteous.
Is there injustice on my tongue? Cannot my taste discern mischievous things?

Is there not a warfare to man upon earth? And are not his days like the days of a hireling?
As a servant who earnestly desires the shadow, and as a hireling who looks for his wages,
so I am made to possess months of misery, and wearisome nights are appointed to me.
When I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? And I am full of tossing to and fro to the dawning of the day.
My flesh is clothed with worms and clods of dust. My skin closes up, and breaks out afresh.
My days are swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and are spent without hope.
O remember that my life is a breath. My eye shall no more see good.
The eye of him who sees me shall behold me no more. Thine eyes shall be upon me, but I shall not be.
As the cloud is consumed and vanishes away, so he who goes down to Sheol shall come up no more.
He shall return no more to his house, nor shall his place know him any more.
Therefore I will not refrain my mouth. I will speak in the anguish of my spirit. I will complain in the bitterness of my soul.
Am I a sea, or a sea-monster, that thou set a watch over me?
When I say, My bed shall comfort me. My couch shall ease my complaint.
Then thou scare me with dreams, and terrify me through visions,
so that my soul chooses strangling and death rather than these my bones.
I loathe my life. I would not live always. Let me alone, for my days are vanity.
What is man, that thou should magnify him, and that thou should set thy mind upon him,
and that thou should visit him every morning, and try him every moment?
How long will thou not look away from me, nor let me alone till I swallow down my spittle?
If I have sinned, what do I do to thee, O thou watcher of men? Why have thou set me as a mark for thee, so that I am a burden to myself?
And why do thou not pardon my transgression, and take away my iniquity? For now I shall lie down in the dust, and thou will seek me diligently, but I shall not be.

Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, and said,
How long will thou speak these things? And how long shall the words of thy mouth be like a mighty wind?
Does God pervert justice? Or does the Almighty pervert righteousness?
If thy sons have sinned against him, and he has delivered them into the hand of their transgression,
if thou would seek diligently to God, and make thy supplication to the Almighty,
if thou were pure and upright, surely now he would awake for thee, and make the habitation of thy righteousness prosperous.
And though thy beginning was small, yet thy latter end would greatly increase.
For inquire, I pray thee, of the former age, and apply thyself to that which their fathers have searched out
(for we are but of yesterday, and know nothing, because our days upon earth are a shadow).
Shall they not teach thee, and tell thee, and utter words out of their heart?
Can the rush grow up without mire? Can a reed grow without water?
While it is yet in its greenness, and not cut down, it withers before any other herb.
So are the paths of all who forget God. And the hope of the profane man shall perish,
whose confidence shall break apart, and whose trust is a spider's web.
He shall lean upon his house, but it shall not stand. He shall hold fast thereby, but it shall not endure.
He is green before the sun, and his shoots go forth over his garden.
His roots are wrapped around the stone heap. He beholds the place of stones.
If he is destroyed from his place, then it shall deny him, saying, I have not seen thee.
Behold, this is the joy of his way, and out of the earth others shall spring.
Behold, God will not cast away a perfect man, nor will he uphold the evildoers.
He will yet fill thy mouth with laughter, and thy lips with shouting.
Those who hate thee shall be clothed with shame, and the tent of the wicked shall be no more.

Then Job answered and said,
Of a truth I know that it is so. But how can man be just with God?
If he is pleased to contend with him, he cannot answer him one of a thousand.
He is wise in heart, and mighty in strength. Who has hardened himself against him, and prospered?
He who removes the mountains, and they do not know it when he overturns them in his anger,
who shakes the earth out of its place, and the pillars of it tremble,
who commands the sun, and it does not rise, and seals up the stars,
who alone stretches out the heavens, and treads upon the waves of the sea,
who makes the Bear, Orion, and the Pleiades, and the chambers of the south,
who does great things past finding out, yea, marvelous things without number.
Lo, he goes by me, and I do not see him. He also passes on, but I do not perceive him.
Behold, he seizes; who can hinder him? Who will say to him, What are thou doing?
God will not withdraw his anger. The helpers of Rahab stoop under him.
How much less shall I answer him, and choose out my words to reason with him?
Whom, though I were righteous, yet I would not answer. I would make supplication to my judge.
If I had called, and he had answered me, yet I would not believe that he hearkened to my voice.
For he breaks me with a tempest, and multiplies my wounds without cause.
He will not allow me to take my breath, but fills me with bitterness.
If of strength, lo, he is mighty! And if of justice, who will summon me?
Though I be righteous, my own mouth shall condemn me. Though I be perfect, it shall prove me perverse.
Though I were perfect, I do not regard myself. I despise my life.
It is all one thing. Therefore I say, He destroys the perfect and the wicked.
If the scourge kills suddenly, he will laugh at the trial of the innocent.
The earth is given into the hand of the wicked. He covers the faces of the judges of it. If not he, who then is it?
Now my days are swifter than a runner. They flee away. They see no good,
They are passed away as the swift ships, as the eagle that swoops on the prey.
If I say, I will forget my complaint. I will put off my sad countenance, and be of good cheer,
I am afraid of all my sorrows. I know that thou will not hold me innocent.
I shall be condemned. Why then do I labor in vain?
If I wash myself with snow water, and make my hands ever so clean,
yet thou will plunge me in the ditch, and my own clothes shall abhor me.
For he is not a man, as I am, that I should answer him, that we should come together in judgment.
There is no umpire between us who might lay his hand upon us both.
Let him take his rod away from me, and let not his terror make me afraid.
Then I would speak, and not be afraid of him, for I am not so in myself.

My soul is weary of my life. I will give free reign to my complaint. I will speak in the bitterness of my soul.
I will say to God, Do not condemn me. Show me why thou contend with me.
Is it good to thee that thou should oppress, that thou should despise the work of thy hands, and shine upon the counsel of the wicked?
Have thou eyes of flesh? Or do thou see as man sees?
Are thy days as the days of man, or thy years as man's days,
that thou inquire after my iniquity, and search after my sin,
although thou know that I am not wicked. And there is none that can deliver out of thy hand?
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me together round about, yet thou destroy me.
Remember, I beseech thee, that thou have fashioned me as clay. And will thou bring me into dust again?
Have thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese?
Thou have clothed me with skin and flesh, and knit me together with bones and sinews.
Thou have granted me life and loving kindness, and thy visitation has preserved my spirit.
Yet these things thou hid in thy heart. I know that this is with thee.
If I sin, then thou mark me. And thou will not acquit me from my iniquity.
If I be wicked, woe to me. And if I be righteous, yet I shall not lift up my head, being filled with shame, and looking upon my affliction.
And if my head exalts itself, thou hunt me as a lion. And again thou show thyself marvelous upon me.
Thou renew thy witnesses against me, and increase thine indignation upon me. Changes and warfare are with me.
Why then have thou brought me forth out of the womb? I would have given up the spirit, and no eye had seen me.
I should have been as though I had not been. I should have been carried from the womb to the grave.
Are not my days few? Cease then, and let me alone, that I may take comfort a little
before I go where I shall not return, to the land of darkness and of the shadow of death,
the land dark as midnight, of the shadow of death, without any order, and where the light is as midnight.

Then Zophar the Naamathite answered, and said,
Should not the multitude of words be answered? And should a man full of talk be justified?
Should thy boastings make men hold their peace? And when thou mock, shall no man make thee ashamed?
For thou say, My doctrine is pure, and I am clean in thine eyes.
But O that God would speak, and open his lips against thee,
and that he would show thee the secrets of wisdom! For he is manifold in understanding. Know therefore that God exacts of thee less than thine iniquity deserves.
Can thou find out God by searching? Can thou find out the Almighty to perfection?
It is high as heaven; what can thou do? Deeper than Sheol; what can thou know?
The measure of it is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.
If he passes through, and shuts up, and all to judgment, then who can hinder him?
For he knows false men. He also sees iniquity. Will he not then consider it?
But vain man is void of understanding. Yea, man is born as a wild donkey's colt.
If thou set thy heart aright, and stretch out thy hands toward him,
if iniquity is in thy hand, put it far away, and let not unrighteousness dwell in thy tents.
Surely then thou shall lift up thy face without spot. Yea, thou shall be steadfast, and shall not fear.
For thou shall forget thy misery. Thou shall remember it as waters that are passed away.
And thy life shall be clearer than the noonday. Though there be darkness, it shall be as the morning.
And thou shall be secure, because there is hope. Yea, thou shall search about thee, and shall take thy rest in safety.
Also thou shall lie down, and none shall make thee afraid. Yea, many shall correspond with thee.
But the eyes of the wicked shall fail, and they shall have no way to flee. And their hope shall be the giving up of the spirit.

Then Job answered and said,
No doubt but ye are the people, and wisdom shall die with you.
But I have understanding as well as you; I am not inferior to you. Yes, who does not know such things as these?
I am as a man who is a laughing-stock to his neighbor. I who called upon God, and he answered. The just, the perfect man is a laughing-stock.
In the thought of him who is at ease there is contempt for calamity. It is ready for those whose foot slips.
The tents of robbers prosper, and those who provoke God are secure. Into whose hand God brings abundantly.
But ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee, and the birds of the heavens, and they shall tell thee.
Or speak to the earth, and it shall teach thee, and the fishes of the sea shall declare to thee.
Who does not know in all these, that the hand of Jehovah has wrought this,
in whose hand is the soul of every living thing, and the breath of all mankind?
Does not the ear try words, even as the palate tastes its food?
With aged men is wisdom, and in length of days understanding.
With God is wisdom and might. He has counsel and understanding.
Behold, he breaks down, and it cannot be built again. He shuts up a man, and there can be no opening.
Behold, he withholds the waters, and they dry up. Again, he sends them out, and they overturn the earth.
With him is strength and wisdom. The deceived and the deceiver are his.
He leads counselors away stripped, and he makes judges fools.
He loosens the bond of kings, and he binds their loins with a belt.
He leads priests away stripped, and overthrows the mighty.
He removes the speech of the trustworthy, and takes away the understanding of the elders.
He pours contempt upon rulers, and weakens the strength of the strong.
He uncovers deep things out of darkness, and brings out to light the shadow of death.
He increases the nations, and he destroys them. He enlarges the nations, and he leads them captive.
He takes away understanding from the chiefs of the people of the earth, and causes them to wander in a wilderness where there is no way.
They grope in the dark without light, and he makes them to stagger like a drunken man.

Lo, my eye has seen all this. My ear has heard and understood it.
What ye know, I also know; I am not inferior to you.
Surely I would speak to the Almighty, and I desire to reason with God.
But ye are forgers of lies. Ye are all physicians of no value.
O that ye would altogether be silent! And it would be your wisdom.
Hear now my reasoning, and hearken to the pleadings of my lips.
Will ye speak unrighteously for God, and talk deceitfully for him?
Will ye show partiality to him? Will ye contend for God?
Is it good that he should search you out? Or as deceiving a man, will ye deceive him?
He will surely reprove you if ye secretly show partiality.
Shall not his majesty make you afraid, and his dread fall upon you?
Your memorable sayings are proverbs of ashes. Your defenses are defenses of clay.
Be quiet. Let me alone that I may speak, and let come on me what will.
Why should I take my flesh in my teeth, and put my life in my hand?
Behold, he will kill me; I have no hope. Nevertheless I will maintain my ways before him.
This also shall be my salvation, that a profane man shall not come before him.
Hear diligently my speech, and let my declaration be in your ears.
Behold now, I have set my case in order. I know that I am righteous.
Who is he who will contend with me? For then I would keep silent and give up the spirit.
Withdraw thy hand far from me, and do not let thy dread make me afraid.
Then call thou, and I will answer, or let me speak, and answer thou me.
How many are my iniquities and sins? Make me to know my transgression and my sin.
Why do thou hide thy face, and reckon me for thine enemy?
Will thou harass a driven leaf? And will thou pursue the dry stubble?
For thou write bitter things against me, and make me to inherit the iniquities of my youth.
Thou also put my feet in the stocks, and mark all my paths. Thou set a bound to the soles of my feet.
Though I am like a rotten thing that decays, like a garment that is moth-eaten.

Man, who is born of a woman, is of few days, and full of trouble.
He comes forth like a flower, and is cut down. He too flees as a shadow, and does not continue.
And do thou open thine eyes upon such a one, and bring me into judgment with thee?
Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.
Seeing his days are determined, the number of his months is with thee, and thou have appointed his bounds that he cannot pass,
look away from him, that he may rest, till he shall accomplish, as a hireling, his day.
For there is hope of a tree, if it is cut down, that it will sprout again, and that the tender branch of it will not cease.
Though the root of it grows old in the earth, and the trunk of it dies in the ground,
yet through the scent of water it will bud, and put forth boughs like a plant.
But man dies, and is laid low. Yea, man gives up the spirit, and where is he?
As the waters fail from the sea, and the river wastes away and dries up,
so man lies down and does not rise. Till the heavens be no more, they shall not awake, nor be roused out of their sleep.
O that thou would hide me in Sheol, that thou would keep me secret, until thy wrath be past, that thou would appoint for me a set time, and remember me!
If a man dies, shall he live again? All the days of my warfare I would wait till my release should come.
Thou would call, and I would answer thee. Thou would have a desire to the work of thy hands.
But now thou number my steps. Do thou not watch over my sin?
My transgression is sealed up in a bag, and thou fasten up my iniquity.
But the falling mountain comes to nothing, and the rock is removed out of its place.
The waters wear the stones. The overflowings of it wash away the dust of the earth. So thou destroy the hope of man.
Thou prevail forever against him, and he passes. Thou change his countenance, and send him away.
His sons come to honor, and he does not know it, and they are brought low, but he does not perceive it of them.
But his flesh upon him has pain, and his soul within him mourns.

Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, and said,
Should a wise man make answer with vain knowledge, and fill himself with the east wind?
Should he reason with unprofitable talk, or with speeches with which he can do no good?
Yea, thou do away with fear, and hinder devotion before God.
For thine iniquity teaches thy mouth. And thou choose the tongue of the crafty.
Thine own mouth condemns thee, and not I. Yes, thine own lips testify against thee.
Are thou the first man who was born? Or were thou brought forth before the hills?
Have thou heard the secret counsel of God? And do thou limit wisdom to thyself?
What do thou know, that we do not know? What do thou understand, which is not in us?
With us are both the gray-headed and the very aged men, much older than thy father.
Are the consolations of God too small for thee, even the word that is gentle toward thee?
Why does thy heart carry thee away? And why do thine eyes flash,
that against God thou turn thy spirit, and let words go out of thy mouth?
What is man, that he should be clean? And he who is born of a woman, that he should be righteous?
Behold, he puts no trust in his holy ones. Yea, the heavens are not clean in his sight.
How much less one who is abominable and corrupt, a man who drinks iniquity like water!
I will show thee. Hear thou me, and that which I have seen I will declare,
which wise men have told from their fathers, and have not hid it,
The wicked man travails with pain all his days, even the number of years that are laid up for the oppressor.
A sound of terrors is in his ears. In prosperity the destroyer shall come upon him.
He does not believe that he shall return out of darkness. And he is awaited by the sword.
He wanders abroad for bread, saying, Where is it? He knows that the day of darkness is ready at his hand.
Distress and anguish make him afraid. They prevail against him as a king ready to the battle.
Because he has stretched out his hand against God, and behaves himself proudly against the Almighty.
He runs upon him with a stiff neck, with the thick studs of his bucklers,
because he has covered his face with his fatness, and gathered fat upon his loins.
And he has dwelt in desolate cities, in houses which no man inhabited, which were ready to become heaps.
He shall not be rich, neither shall his substance continue, neither shall their possessions be extended on the earth.
He shall not depart out of darkness. The flame shall dry up his branches, and by the breath of God's mouth he shall go away.
Let him not trust in vanity, deceiving himself. For vanity shall be his recompense.
It shall be accomplished before his time, and his branch shall not be green.
He shall shake off his unripe grape as the vine, and shall cast off his flower as the olive tree.
For the company of the hypocrites shall be barren, and fire shall consume the tents of bribery.
They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity, and their heart prepares deceit.

Then Job answered, and said,
I have heard many such things. Miserable comforters are ye all.
Shall vain words have an end? Or what provokes thee that thou answer?
I also could speak as ye do, if your soul were in my soul's stead. I could join words together against you, and shake my head at you.
But I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the solace of my lips would assuage your grief.
Though I speak, my grief is not assuaged, and though I forbear, what am I eased?
But now he has made me weary. Thou have made desolate all my company.
And thou have laid fast hold on me, which is a witness against me. And my leanness rises up against me; it testifies to my face.
He has torn me in his wrath, and persecuted me. He has gnashed upon me with his teeth. My adversary sharpens his eyes upon me.
They have gaped upon me with their mouth. They have smitten me upon the cheek reproachfully. They gather themselves together against me.
God delivers me to the perverse, and casts me into the hands of the wicked.
I was at ease, and he broke me apart. Yea, he has taken me by the neck, and dashed me to pieces. He has also set me up for his mark.
His archers encompass me round about. He splits my reins apart, and does not spare. He pours out my gall upon the ground.
He breaks me with breach upon breach. He runs upon me like a giant.
I have sewed sackcloth upon my skin, and have laid my horn in the dust.
My face is red with weeping, and the shadow of death is on my eyelids,
although there is no violence in my hands, and my prayer is pure.
O earth, do not cover thou my blood, and let my cry have no resting place.
Even now, behold, my witness is in heaven, and he who vouches for me is on high.
My friends scoff at me. My eye pours out tears to God
that he would maintain the right of a man with God, and of a son of man with his neighbor!
For when a few years are come, I shall go the way where I shall not return.

My spirit is consumed, my days are extinct, the grave is ready for me.
Surely there are mockers with me, and my eye dwells upon their provocation.
Give now a pledge, be surety for me with thyself. Who is there that will strike hands with me?
For thou have hid their heart from understanding. Therefore thou shall not exalt them.
He who denounces his friends for a prey, even the eyes of his sons shall fail.
But he has made me a byword of the people, and they spit in my face.
My eye also is dim because of sorrow, and all my members are as a shadow.
Upright men shall be astonished at this, and the innocent shall stir himself up against the profane.
Yet the righteous shall hold on his way. And he who has clean hands shall grow stronger and stronger.
But as for you all, come on now again, and I shall not find a wise man among you.
My days are past. My purposes are broken off, even the thoughts of my heart.
They change the night into day. The light, they say, is near to the darkness.
If I look for Sheol as my house, if I have spread my couch in the darkness,
if I have said to corruption, Thou are my father, to the worm, My mother, and my sister,
where then is my hope? And as for my hope, who shall see it?
It shall go down to the bars of Sheol when once there is rest in the dust.

Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, and said,
How long will ye hunt for words? Consider, and afterwards we will speak.
Why are we counted as beasts, and have become unclean in your eyes?
Thou who tear thyself in thine anger, shall the earth be forsaken for thee? Or shall the rock be removed out of its place?
Yea, the light of the wicked shall be put out, and the spark of his fire shall not shine.
The light shall be dark in his tent, and his lamp above him shall be put out.
The steps of his strength shall be restricted, and his own counsel shall cast him down.
For he is cast into a net by his own feet, and he walks upon the toils.
A trap shall take him by the heel. A snare shall lay hold on him.
A noose is hid for him in the ground, and a trap for him in the way.
Terrors shall make him afraid on every side, and shall chase him at his heels.
His strength shall be weakened by hunger, and calamity shall be ready at his side.
The members of his body shall be devoured. The firstborn of death shall devour his body-parts.
He shall be rooted out of his tent where he trusts, and he shall be brought to the king of terrors.
There shall dwell in his tent that which is none of his. Brimstone shall be scattered upon his habitation.
His roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branch be cut off.
His remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have no name in the street.
He shall be driven from light into darkness, and chased out of the world.
He shall have neither son nor son's son among his people, nor any remaining where he sojourned.
Those who come after shall be astonished at his day, as those who went before were frightened.
Surely such are the dwellings of the unrighteous, and this is the place of him who does not know God.

Then Job answered, and said,
How long will ye vex my soul, and break me in pieces with words?
These ten times ye have reproached me. Ye are not ashamed that ye deal hardly with me.
And be it indeed that I have erred, my error remains with myself.
If indeed ye will magnify yourselves against me, and plead against me my reproach,
know now that God has subverted me, and has encompassed me with his net.
Behold, I cry out of wrong, but I am not heard. I cry for help, but there is no justice.
He has walled up my way that I cannot pass, and has set darkness in my paths.
He has stripped me of my glory, and taken the crown from my head.
He has broken me down on every side, and I am gone. And he has plucked up my hope like a tree.
He has also kindled his wrath against me. And he considers me to him as his adversaries.
His troops come on together, and cast up their way against me, and encamp round about my tent.
He has put my brothers far from me, and my acquaintances are wholly estranged from me.
My kinsfolk have failed, and my familiar friends have forgotten me.
Those who dwell in my house, and my maids, reckon me for a stranger; I am an alien in their sight.
I call to my servant, and he gives me no answer. I entreat him with my mouth.
My breath is strange to my wife, and my supplication to the sons of my own mother.
Even young children despise me. If I arise, they speak against me.
All my familiar friends abhor me, and those whom I loved are turned against me.
My bone cleaves to my skin and to my flesh, and I have escaped with the skin of my teeth.
Have pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends, for the hand of God has touched me.
Why do ye persecute me as God, and are not satisfied with my flesh?
O that my words were now written! O that they were inscribed in a book,
that they were engraved in the rock forever with an iron pen and lead!
But as for me I know that my Redeemer lives, and at last he will stand up upon the earth.
And after my skin, this body, is destroyed, then outside my flesh I shall see God,
whom I, even I, shall see on my side, and my eyes shall behold, and not as a stranger. My heart is consumed within me.
If ye say, How we will persecute him! And that the root of the matter is found in me,
be ye afraid of the sword. For wrath brings the punishments of the sword, that ye may know there is a judgment.

Then Zophar the Naamathite answered, and said,
Therefore my thoughts cause me to answer, even because of my haste that is in me.
I have heard the reproof which puts me to shame, and the spirit of my understanding answers me.
Know thou this of old time, since man was placed upon earth,
that the triumphing of the wicked is short, and the joy of the profane but for a moment?
Though his height mounts up to the heavens, and his head reaches to the clouds,
yet he shall perish forever like his own dung. Those who have seen him shall say, Where is he?
He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found. Yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night.
The eye which saw him shall see him no more, neither shall his place any more behold him.
His sons shall seek the favor of the poor, and his hands shall give back his wealth.
His bones are full of his youth, but it shall lie down with him in the dust.
Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth, though he hide it under his tongue,
though he spares it, and will not let it go, but keep it still within his mouth,
yet his food in his bowels is turned. It is the gall of asps within him.
He has swallowed down riches, and he shall vomit them up again. God will cast them out of his belly.
He shall suck the poison of asps. The viper's tongue shall kill him.
He shall not look upon the rivers, the flowing streams of honey and butter.
That which he labored for shall he restore, and shall not swallow it down. According to the substance that he has gotten, he shall not rejoice.
For he has oppressed and forsaken the poor. He has violently taken away a house, and he shall not build it up.
Because he knew no quietness within him, he shall not save any of that in which he delights.
There was nothing left that he did not devour, therefore his prosperity shall not endure.
In the fullness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits. The hand of everyone who is in misery shall come upon him.
When he is about to fill his belly, God will cast the fierceness of his wrath upon him, and will rain it upon him while he is eating.
He shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of brass shall strike him through.
He draws it forth, and it comes out of his body, yea, the glittering point comes out of his gall. Terrors are upon him.
All darkness is laid up for his treasures. A fire not blown shall devour him. It shall consume that which is left in his tent.
The heavens shall reveal his iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against him.
The increase of his house shall depart, flowed away in the day of his wrath.
This is the portion of a wicked man from God, and the heritage appointed to him by God.

Then Job answered, and said,
Hear diligently my speech, And let this be your consolations.
Allow me, and I also will speak, and after I have spoken, mock on.
As for me, is my complaint to man? And why should I not be impatient?
Mark me, and be astonished, and lay your hand upon your mouth.
Even when I remember, I am troubled, and horror takes hold on my flesh.
Why do the wicked live, become old, yea, grow mighty in power?
Their seed is established with them in their sight, and their offspring before their eyes.
Their houses are safe from fear, nor is the rod of God upon them.
Their bull breeds, and does not fail. Their cow brings forth safely, and does not miscarry.
They send forth their little ones like a flock, and their children dance.
They sing to the timbrel and harp, and rejoice at the sound of the pipe.
They spend their days in prosperity, and in a moment they go down to Sheol.
And they say to God, Depart from us, for we do not desire the knowledge of thy ways.
What is the Almighty that we should serve him? And what profit should we have, if we pray to him?
Lo, is their prosperity not in their hand. (The counsel of the wicked is far from me.)
How often is it that the lamp of the profane is put out, that their calamity comes upon them, that God distributes sorrows in his anger,
that they are as stubble before the wind, and as chaff that the storm carries away?
Ye say, God lays up his iniquity for his sons. Let him recompense it to himself that he may know it.
Let his own eyes see his destruction, and let him drink of the wrath of the Almighty.
For what does he care for his house after him when the number of his months is cut off?
Shall any teach God knowledge, seeing he judges those who are high?
One man dies in his full strength, being wholly at ease and quiet.
His pails are full of milk, and the marrow of his bones is moistened.
And another man dies in bitterness of soul, and never tastes of good.
They lie down alike in the dust, and the worm covers them.
Behold, I know your thoughts, and the devices with which ye would wrong me.
For ye say, Where is the house of the prince? And where is the tent in which the wicked dwelt?
Have ye not asked wayfaring men? And do ye not know their evidences,
that the evil man is reserved to the day of calamity? That they are led forth to the day of wrath?
Who shall declare his way to his face? And who shall repay him what he has done?
Yet he shall be borne to the grave, and men shall keep watch over the tomb.
The clods of the valley shall be sweet to him. And all men shall draw after him, as there were innumerable before him.
How then ye comfort me in vain, seeing in your answers there remains falsehood?

Then Eliphaz the Temanite answered, and said,
Can a man be profitable to God? Surely he who is wise is profitable to himself.
Is it any pleasure to the Almighty that thou are righteous? Or is it gain to him that thou make thy ways perfect?
Is it for thy fear of him that he reproves thee, that he enters with thee into judgment?
Is not thy wickedness great? Neither is there any end to thine iniquities.
For thou have taken pledges from thy brother for nothing, and stripped the naked of their clothing.
Thou have not given water to the weary to drink, and thou have withheld bread from the hungry.
But as for the mighty man, he had the land. And the honorable man, he dwelt in it.
Thou have sent widows away empty, and the arms of the fatherless have been broken.
Therefore snares are round about thee, and sudden fear troubles thee,
or darkness, so that thou cannot see, and abundance of waters cover thee.
Is not God in the height of heaven? And behold the height of the stars, how high they are!
And thou say, What does God know? Can he judge through the thick darkness?
Thick clouds are a covering to him, so that he does not see, and he walks on the vault of heaven.
Will thou keep the old way which wicked men have trodden?
Who were snatched away before their time, whose foundation was poured out as a stream,
who said to God, Depart from us, and, What can the Almighty do for us?
Yet he filled their houses with good things. But the counsel of the wicked is far from me.
The righteous see it, and are glad. And the innocent laugh them to scorn,
Saying, Surely those who rose up against us are cut off, and the remnant of them, the fire has consumed.
Acquaint now thyself with him, and be at peace. By this good shall come to thee.
Receive, I pray thee, the law from his mouth, and lay up his words in thy heart.
If thou return to the Almighty, thou shall be built up, thou put away unrighteousness far from thy tents.
Then thou shall lay up gold as dust, and the gold of Ophir as the stones of the brooks.
Yea, the Almighty will be thy treasure, and precious silver to thee.
For then shall thou delight thyself in the Almighty, and shall lift up thy face to God.
Thou shall make thy prayer to him, and he will hear thee, and thou shall pay thy vows.
Thou shall also decree a thing, and it shall be established to thee. And light shall shine upon thy ways.
When they cast thee down, thou shall say, There is lifting up, and he will save the humble man.
He will deliver even him who is not innocent. Yea, he shall be delivered through the cleanness of thy hands.

Then Job answered and said,
Even today my complaint is rebellious. My stroke is heavier than my groaning.
O that I knew where I might find him, that I might come even to his seat!
I would set my case in order before him, and fill my mouth with arguments.
I would know the words which he would answer me, and understand what he would say to me.
Would he contend with me in the greatness of his power? No, but he would give heed to me.
There the upright might reason with him. So I should be delivered forever from my judge.
Behold, I go forward, but he is not there, and backward, but I cannot perceive him,
on the left hand, when he works, but I cannot behold him. He hides himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him.
But he knows the way that I take. When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.
My foot has held fast to his steps. I have kept his way, and not turned aside.
I have not gone back from the commandment of his lips, I have treasured up the words of his mouth more than my necessary food.
But he is in one mind, and who can turn him? And what his soul desires, even that he does.
For he performs that which is appointed for me. And many such things are with him.
Therefore I am terrified at his presence. When I consider, I am afraid of him.
For God has made my heart faint, and the Almighty has terrified me,
because I was not cut off before the darkness, nor did he cover the thick darkness from my face.

Why are times not laid up by the Almighty? And why do those who know him not see his days?
There are men who remove the landmarks. They take away flocks violently, and feed them.
They drive away the donkey of the fatherless. They take the widow's ox for a pledge.
They turn the needy out of the way. The poor of the earth all hide themselves.
Behold, as wild donkeys in the desert, they go forth to their work, seeking diligently for food. The wilderness yields them bread for their sons.
They cut their provender in the field, and they glean the vintage of the wicked.
They lie all night naked without clothing, and have no covering in the cold.
They are wet with the showers of the mountains, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter.
There are men who pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor,
so that they go about naked without clothing, and being hungry they carry the sheaves.
They make oil within the walls of these men. They tread their winepresses, and suffer thirst.
From out of the populous city men groan, and the soul of the wounded cries out. Yet God does not regard the folly.
These are of those who rebel against the light. They do not know the ways of it, nor abide in the paths of it.
The murderer rises with the light. He kills the poor and needy. And in the night he is as a thief.
The eye also of the adulterer waits for the twilight, saying, No eye shall see me. And he disguises his face.
In the dark they dig through houses. They shut themselves up in the daytime. They do not know the light.
For the morning is to all of them as thick darkness. For they know the terrors of the thick darkness.
Swiftly they pass away upon the face of the waters. Their portion is cursed in the earth. They do not turn into the way of the vineyards.
Drought and heat consume the snow waters, and Sheol those who have sinned.
The womb shall forget him. The worm shall feed sweetly on him. He shall be no more remembered. And unrighteousness shall be broken as a tree.
He devours the barren who do not bear, and does no good to the widow.
Yet God preserves the mighty by his power. He rises up who has no assurance of life.
God gives them to be in security, and they rest in it. And his eyes are upon their ways.
They are exalted. Yet a little while, and they are gone. Yea, they are brought low. They are taken out of the way as all others, and are cut off as the tops of the ears of grain.
And if it be not so now, who will prove me a liar, and make my speech worth nothing?

Then Bildad the Shuhite answered, and said,
Dominion and fear are with him. He makes peace in his high places.
Is there any number of his armies? And upon whom does his light not arise?
How then can man be just with God? Or how can he be clean who is born of a woman?
Behold, even the moon has no brightness. And the stars are not pure in his sight.
How much less man, who is a worm! And the son of man, who is a worm!

Then Job answered, and said,
How thou have helped him who is without power! How thou have saved the arm that has no strength!
How thou have counseled him who has no wisdom, and plentifully declared sound knowledge!
To whom have thou uttered words? And whose spirit came forth from thee?
Those who are deceased tremble beneath the waters and the inhabitants of it.
Sheol is naked before God, and Abaddon has no covering.
He stretches out the north over empty space, and hangs the earth upon nothing.
He binds up the waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not burst under them.
He encloses the face of his throne, and spreads his cloud upon it.
He has described a boundary upon the face of the waters, to the confines of light and darkness.
The pillars of heaven tremble and are astonished at his rebuke.
He stirs up the sea with his power, and by his understanding he smites through Rahab.
By his Spirit the heavens are garnished. His hand has pierced the swift serpent.
Lo, these are but the periphery of his ways. And how small a whisper do we hear of him! But the thunder of his power who can understand?

And Job again took up his discourse, and said,
As God lives, who has taken away my right, and the Almighty, who has vexed my soul.
(For my life is yet whole in me. And the spirit of God is in my nostrils.)
Surely my lips shall not speak unrighteousness, nor shall my tongue utter deceit.
Far be it from me that I should justify you. Till I die I will not put away my integrity from me.
I hold fast my righteousness, and will not let it go. My heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.
Let my enemy be as the wicked, and let him who rises up against me be as the unrighteous.
For what is the hope of the profane, though he gets him gain, when God takes away his soul?
Will God hear his cry when trouble comes upon him?
Will he delight himself in the Almighty, and call upon God at all times?
I will teach you concerning the hand of God. That which is with the Almighty I will not conceal.
Behold, all ye yourselves have seen it. Why then have ye become altogether vain?
This is the portion of a wicked man with God, and the heritage of oppressors, which they receive from the Almighty.
If his sons be multiplied, it is for the sword. And his offspring shall not be satisfied with bread.
Those who remain of him shall be buried in death, and his widows shall make no lamentation.
Though he heaps up silver as the dust, and prepares raiment as the clay,
he may prepare it, but the just shall put it on, and the innocent shall divide the silver.
He builds his house as the moth, and as a booth which the keeper makes.
He lies down rich, but he shall not be gathered to his fathers. He opens his eyes, and he is not.
Terrors overtake him like waters. A tempest steals him away in the night.
The east wind carries him away, and he departs, and it sweeps him out of his place.
For God shall hurl at him, and not spare. He would gladly flee out of his hand.
Men shall clap their hands at him, and shall hiss him out of his place.

Surely there is a mine for silver, and a place for gold which they refine.
Iron is taken out of the earth, and copper is molten out of the stone.
Man sets an end to darkness, and searches out to the furthest bound the stones of obscurity and of thick darkness.
He breaks open a shaft away from where men sojourn, paths forgotten by the foot. They hang afar from men; they swing to and fro.
As for the earth, out of it comes bread, and underneath it is turned up as it were by fire.
The stones of it are the place of sapphires, and it has dust of gold.
No bird of prey knows that path, nor has the falcon's eye seen it.
The proud beasts have not trodden it, nor has the fierce lion passed thereby.
He puts forth his hand upon the flinty rock. He overturns the mountains by the roots.
He cuts out channels among the rocks, and his eye sees every precious thing.
He binds the streams that they not trickle. And the thing that is hid he brings forth to light.
But where shall wisdom be found? And where is the place of understanding?
Man does not know the price of it, nor is it found in the land of the living.
The deep says, It is not in me. And the sea says, It is not with me.
It cannot be gotten for gold, nor shall silver be weighed for the price of it.
It cannot be valued with the gold of Ophir, with the precious onyx, or the sapphire.
Gold and glass cannot equal it, nor shall it be exchanged for jewels of fine gold.
No mention shall be made of coral or of crystal. Yea, the price of wisdom is above rubies.
The topaz of Ethiopia shall not equal it, nor shall it be valued with pure gold.
Where then does wisdom come from? And where is the place of understanding?
Since it is hid from the eyes of all living, and kept closed from the birds of the heavens.
Destruction and Death say, We have heard a rumor of it with our ears.
God understands the way of it, and he knows the place of it.
For he looks to the ends of the earth, and sees under the whole heaven,
to make a weight for the wind. Yea, he distributes the waters by measure.
When he made a decree for the rain, and a way for the lightning of the thunder,
then he saw it, and declared it. He established it, yea, and searched it out.
And to man he said, Behold, the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil is understanding.

And Job again took up his discourse, and said,
O that I were as in the months of old, as in the days when God watched over me,
when his lamp shone upon my head, and by his light I walked through darkness,
as I was in the ripeness of my days, when the friendship of God was upon my tent,
when the Almighty was yet with me, and my sons were about me,
when my steps were washed with butter, and the rock poured out streams of oil to me,
when I went forth to the gate to the city, when I prepared my seat in the street.
The young men saw me and hid themselves, and the aged rose up and stood.
The rulers refrained from talking, and laid their hand on their mouth.
The voice of the ranking men was hushed, and their tongue stuck to the roof of their mouth.
For when the ear heard me, then it blessed me, and when the eye saw me, it gave witness to me.
Because I delivered the poor who cried, also the fatherless who had none to help him.
The blessing of him who was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused the widow's heart to sing for joy.
I put on righteousness, and it clothed me. My justice was as a robe and a diadem.
I was eyes to the blind, and I was feet to the lame.
I was a father to the needy, and I searched out the case of him whom I did not know.
And I broke the jaws of the unrighteous, and plucked the prey out of his teeth.
Then I said, I shall die in my nest, and I shall multiply my days as the sand.
My root is spread out to the waters, and the dew lays all night upon my branch.
My glory is fresh in me, and my bow is renewed in my hand.
To me men gave ear, and waited, and kept silence for my counsel.
After my words they spoke not again, and my speech distilled upon them.
And they waited for me as for the rain. And they opened their mouth wide as for the latter rain.
I smiled on them when they had no confidence, and they did not cast down the light of my countenance.
I chose out their way, and sat as chief, and dwelt as a king in the army, as a man who comforts the mourners.

But now those who are younger than I have me in derision, whose fathers I disdained to set with the dogs of my flock.
Yea, the strength of their hands, to what should it profit me? Men in whom ripe age is perished.
They are gaunt with want and famine. They gnaw the dry ground in the gloom of waste and desolation.
They pluck mallows by the bushes, and the roots of the juniper are their food.
They are driven forth from the midst of men. They cry out after them as after a thief,
so that they dwell in frightful valleys, in holes of the earth and of the rocks.
Among the bushes they bray, under the nettles they are gathered together.
They are sons of fools, yea, sons of base men. They were scourged out of the land.
And now I have become their song, Yea, I am a byword to them.
They abhor me. They stand aloof from me, and do not spare to spit in my face.
For he has loosed his cord, and afflicted me. And they have cast off the bridle before me.
Upon my right hand rise the rabble. They thrust aside my feet, and they cast up against me their ways of destruction.
They mar my path. They set forward my calamity, even men who have no helper.
As through a wide breach they come. In the midst of the ruin they roll themselves upon me.
Terrors are turned upon me. They chase my honor as the wind, and my welfare is passed away as a cloud.
And now my soul is poured out within me. Days of affliction have taken hold upon me.
In the night season my bones are pierced in me, and the pains that gnaw me take no rest.
By the great force my garment is disfigured. It binds me about as the collar of my coat.
He has cast me into the mire, and I have become like dust and ashes.
I cry to thee, and thou do not answer me. I stand up, and thou gaze at me.
Thou have turned to be cruel to me. With the might of thy hand thou persecute me.
Thou lift me up to the wind. Thou cause me to ride upon it, and thou disintegrate me in the storm.
For I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house appointed for all living.
However does not a man stretch out the hand in his fall? Or in his calamity therefore cry for help?
Did I not weep for him who was in trouble? Was not my soul grieved for the needy?
When I looked for good, then evil came. And when I waited for light, there came darkness.
My heart is troubled, and does not rest. Days of affliction have come upon me.
I go mourning without the sun. I stand up in the assembly, and cry for help.
I am a brother to jackals, and a companion to ostriches.
My skin is black, and falls from me. And my bones are burned with heat.
Therefore my harp has turned to mourning, and my pipe into the voice of those who weep.

I made a covenant with my eyes. How then should I look upon a virgin?
For what is the portion from God above, and the heritage from the Almighty on high?
Is it not calamity to the unrighteous, and disaster to the workers of iniquity?
Does he not see my ways, and number all my steps?
If I have walked with falsehood, and my foot has hastened to deceit
(let me be weighed in an even balance, that God may know my integrity);
if my step has turned out of the way, and my heart walked after my eyes, and if any spot has clung to my hands,
then let me sow, and let another eat, yea, let the produce of my field be rooted out.
If my heart has been enticed to a woman, and I have laid wait at my neighbor's door,
then let my wife grind to another, and let others bow down upon her.
For that is a heinous crime, yea, it is an iniquity to be punished by the judges.
For it is a fire that consumes to destruction, and would root out all my increase.
If I have despised the case of my man-servant or of my maid-servant when they contended with me,
what then shall I do when God rises up? And when he visits, what shall I answer him?
Did not he who made me in the womb make him? And did not one fashion us in the womb?
If I have withheld the poor from their desire, or have caused the eyes of the widow to fail,
or have eaten my morsel alone, and the fatherless has not eaten of it
(no, from my youth he grew up with me as with a father, and her I have guided from my mother's womb);
if I have seen any perish for lack of clothing, or that the needy had no covering;
if his loins have not blessed me, and if he has not been warmed with the fleece of my sheep;
if I have lifted up my hand against the fatherless, because I saw my help in the gate,
then let my shoulder fall from the shoulder-blade, and my arm be broken from the bone.
For calamity from God is a terror to me, and I can do nothing because of his majesty.
If I have made gold my hope, and have said to the fine gold, Thou are my confidence;
if I have rejoiced because my wealth was great, and because my hand had gotten much;
if I have beheld the sun when it shone, or the moon walking in brightness,
and my heart has been secretly enticed, and my mouth has kissed my hand
(this also is an iniquity to be punished by the judges, for I would have denied the God that is above);
if I have rejoiced at the destruction of him who hated me, or lifted up myself when evil found him
(yea, I have not allowed my mouth to sin by asking his life with a curse);
if the men of my tent have not said, Who can find one who has not been filled with his food?
(the sojourner has not lodged in the street, but I have opened my doors to the traveler);
if like Adam I have covered my transgressions by hiding my iniquity in my bosom
because I feared the great multitude, and the contempt of families terrified me so that I kept silence, and did not go out of the door-
O that I had someone to hear me (Lo, here is my signature, let the Almighty answer me), and that I had the indictment which my adversary has written!
Surely I would carry it upon my shoulder. I would bind it to me as a crown.
I would declare to him the number of my steps. I would go near to him as a prince.
If my land cries out against me, and the furrows of it weep together;
if I have eaten the fruits of it without money, or have caused the owners of it to lose their lives,
let thistles grow instead of wheat, and cockle instead of barley. The words of Job are ended.

So these three men ceased to answer Job because he was righteous in his own eyes.
Then the anger of Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite, of the family of Ram, was kindled. His anger was kindled against Job because he justified himself rather than God.
His anger was also kindled against his three friends because they had found no answer, and yet had condemned Job.
Now Elihu had waited to speak to Job, because they were older than he.
And when Elihu saw that there was no answer in the mouth of these three men, his anger was kindled.
And Elihu the son of Barachel the Buzite answered and said, I am young, and ye are very old. Therefore I held back, and dared not show you my opinion.
I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom.
But there is a spirit in man, and the breath of the Almighty gives them understanding.
It is not the great who are wise, nor the aged who understand justice.
Therefore I said, Hearken to me, I also will show my opinion.
Behold, I waited for your words, I listened for your reasonings, while ye searched out what to say.
Yea, I attended to you. And, behold, there was none who convinced Job, or who answered his words among you.
Beware lest ye say, We have found wisdom. God may vanquish him, not man.
For he has not directed his words against me. Neither will I answer him with your speeches.
They are amazed, they answer no more. They have not a word to say.
And shall I wait because they do not speak, because they stand still, and answer no more?
I also will answer my part. I also will show my opinion,
for I am full of words. The spirit within me compels me.
Behold, my breast is as wine which has no vent. Like new wine-skins it is ready to burst.
I will speak that I may be refreshed. I will open my lips and answer.
Let me not, I pray you, respect any man's person. Neither will I give flattering titles to any man.
For I know not to give flattering titles, else my maker would soon take me away.

However, Job, I pray thee, hear my speech, and hearken to all my words.
Behold now, I have opened my mouth. My tongue has spoken in my mouth.
My words shall utter the uprightness of my heart, and that which my lips know they shall speak sincerely.
The Spirit of God has made me, and the breath of the Almighty gives me life.
If thou can, answer thou me. Set thy words in order before me. Stand forth.
Behold, I am toward God even as thou are. I also am formed out of the clay.
Behold, my terror shall not make thee afraid, nor shall my pressure be heavy upon thee.
Surely thou have spoken in my hearing, and I have heard the voice of thy words, saying,
I am clean, without transgression. I am innocent, neither is there iniquity in me.
Thou say, Behold, he finds occasions against me. He counts me for his enemy.
He puts my feet in the stocks. He marks all my paths.
Behold, I will answer thee. In this thou are not just, for God is greater than man.
Why do thou strive against him because he does not give account of any of his matters?
For God speaks once, yea twice, though man does not regard it.
In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men, in slumberings upon the bed.
Then he opens the ears of men, and seals their instruction
that he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide pride from man.
He keeps back his soul from the pit, and his life from perishing by the sword.
He also is chastened with pain upon his bed, and with continual strife in his bones,
so that his life abhors bread, and his soul dainty food.
His flesh is consumed away that it cannot be seen. And his bones that were not seen stick out.
Yea, his soul draws near to the pit, and his life to the destroyers.
If there be with him an agent, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show to man what is right for him,
then God is gracious to him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the pit; I have found a ransom.
His flesh shall be fresher than a child's. He returns to the days of his youth.
He prays to God, and he is favorable to him, so that he sees his face with joy, and he restores to man his righteousness.
He sings before men, and says, I have sinned, and perverted that which was right, and it did not profit me.
He has redeemed my soul from going into the pit, and my life shall behold the light.
Lo, all these things God works twice, yea thrice, with a man,
to bring back his soul from the pit, that he may be enlightened with the light of the living.
Mark well, O Job, hearken to me. Keep silent, and I will speak.
If thou have anything to say, answer me. Speak, for I desire to justify thee.
If not, hearken thou to me. Keep silent, and I will teach thee.

Moreover Elihu answered, and said,
Hear my words, ye wise men, and give ear to me, ye who have knowledge.
For the ear tries words as the palate tastes food.
Let us choose for us that which is right. Let us know among ourselves what is good.
For Job has said, I am righteous, and God has taken away my right.
Notwithstanding my right I am accounted a liar. My wound is incurable, though I am without transgression.
What man is like Job, who drinks up scorning like water,
saying, I have not sinned, nor committed unrighteousness, nor had fellowship with workers of iniquity to go with the profane.
For thou should not say, There shall be no visitation to a man, whereas visitation is to him from the Lord.
Therefore hearken to me, ye men of understanding. Far be it from me to sin before the Lord, and pervert righteousness before the Almighty.
For the work of a man he will render to him, and cause every man to find according to his ways.
Yea, certainly God will not do wrong. Neither will the Almighty pervert justice.
Who gave him a charge over the earth? Or who has disposed the whole world?
If he sets his heart upon himself, if he gathers his spirit and his breath to himself,
all flesh shall perish together, and man shall turn again to dust.
If now thou be understanding, hear this. Hearken to the voice of words.
Behold thou him who hates lawlessness, and who destroys evil men, who is forever righteousness,
him who says to a king, Thou are vile, to ranking men, Ye are wicked,
who does not respect the persons of rulers, nor regards the rich more than the poor. For they all are the work of his hands.
In a moment they die, even at midnight. The people are shaken and pass away, and the mighty are taken away without hand.
For his eyes are upon the ways of a man, and he sees all his goings.
There is no darkness, nor thick gloom where the workers of iniquity may hide themselves.
For he needs no further to consider a man, that he should go before God in judgment.
He breaks in pieces mighty men in ways past finding out, and sets others in their stead.
Therefore he takes knowledge of their works, and he overturns them in the night, so that they are destroyed.
He strikes them as wicked men in the open sight of others
because they turned aside from following him, and would not have regard in any of his ways,
so that they caused the cry of the poor to come to him, and he heard the cry of the afflicted.
When he gives quietness, who then can condemn? And when he hides his face, who then can behold him? It is the same whether to a nation, or to a man,
that the profane man not reign, that there be none to ensnare the people.
For has any said to God, I have borne chastisement, I will not offend any more.
Teach thou me that which I do not see. If I have done iniquity, I will do it no more?
Shall his recompense be as thou desire, that thou refuse it? For thou must choose, and not I. Therefore speak what thou know.
Men of understanding will say to me, yes, every wise man who hears me,
Job speaks without knowledge, and his words are without wisdom.
But surely not. Learn thou Job not to still give an answer like the foolish,
so that we may not add to our sins, and lawlessness will be reckoned against us, speaking many words before the Lord.

Moreover Elihu answered, and said,
What is this thou think in judgment? Who are thou that thou said, I am righteousness before the Lord?
That thou said, What advantage will it be to thee? And, What profit shall I have more than if I had sinned?
I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee.
Look to the heavens, and see. And behold the skies, which are higher than thou.
If thou have sinned, what do thou effect against him? And if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou to him?
If thou be righteous, what do thou give him? Or what does he receive of thy hand?
Thy wickedness is a man as thou are, and thy righteousness is a son of man.
Because of the multitude of oppressions they cry out. They cry for help because of the arm of the mighty.
But none says, Where is God my maker who gives songs in the night,
who teaches us more than the beasts of the earth, and makes us wiser than the birds of the heavens?
There they cry, but none gives answer, because of the pride of evil men.
Surely God will not hear an empty cry, nor will the Almighty regard it.
How much less when thou say thou do not behold him. The case is before him, and thou wait for him!
But now, because he has not visited in his anger, nor does he greatly regard folly,
so Job opens his mouth in vanity. He multiplies words without knowledge.

Elihu also proceeded, and said,
Allow me a little, and I will show thee. For I have yet somewhat to say on God's behalf.
I will fetch my knowledge from afar, and will ascribe righteousness to my maker.
(For truly my words are not false.) He who is perfect in knowledge is with thee.
Behold, God is mighty, and does not despise. He is mighty in strength of understanding.
He does not preserve the life of the wicked, but gives to the afflicted their right.
He does not withdraw his eyes from the righteous, but he sets them forever with kings upon the throne, and they are exalted.
And if they be bound in fetters, and be taken in the cords of afflictions,
then he shows them their work, and their transgressions, that they have behaved themselves proudly.
He also opens their ear to instruction, and commands that they return from iniquity.
If they hearken and serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years in pleasures.
But if they do not hearken, they shall perish by the sword, and they shall die without knowledge.
But those who are godless in heart lay up anger. They do not cry for help when he binds them.
They die in youth, and their life perishes among the unclean.
He delivers the afflicted by their affliction, and opens their ear in oppression.
Yea, he would have allured thee out of distress into a broad place, where there is no confinement, and that which is set on thy table would be full of fatness.
But thou have fulfilled the judgment of the wicked. Judgment and justice take hold,
and there shall be wrath upon the impious because of the ungodliness of bribes which the unrighteous receive.
Will thy cry not avail in distress, or all the forces of strength?
Do not desire the night, when peoples are cut off in their place.
Take heed. Do not turn to iniquity, for thou have fixed on this because of affliction.
Behold, God does loftily in his power. Who is a teacher like him?
Who has enjoined him his way? Or who can say, Thou have wrought unrighteousness?
Remember that thou magnify his work, of which men have sung.
All men have looked on it. Man beholds it afar off.
Behold, God is great, and we do not know him. The number of his years is unsearchable.
For he draws up the drops of water, which distil in rain from his vapor,
which the skies pour down and drop upon man abundantly.
Yea, can any understand the spreadings of the clouds, the thunderings of his pavilion?
Behold, he spreads his light around him, and he covers the bottom of the sea.
For by these he judges the peoples. He gives food in abundance.
He covers his hands with the lightning, and gives it a command that it strike the mark.
The noise of it tells concerning him. The cattle also concerning the storm that comes up.

Yea, at this my heart trembles, and is moved out of its place.
Hear, O, hear the noise of his voice, and the sound that goes out of his mouth.
He sends it forth under the whole heaven, and his lightning to the ends of the earth.
After it a voice roars. He thunders with the voice of his majesty, and he does not restrain the lightnings when his voice is heard.
God thunders marvelously with his voice. He does great things which we cannot comprehend.
For he says to the snow, Fall thou on the earth, likewise to the shower of rain, and to the showers of his mighty rain.
He seals up the hand of every man, that all men whom he has made may know it.
Then the beasts go into coverts, and remain in their dens.
Out of the chamber of the south comes the storm, and cold out of the north.
By the breath of God ice is given, and the breadth of the waters is narrowed.
Yea, he loads the thick cloud with moisture. He spreads abroad the cloud of his lightning,
and it is turned round about by his guidance, that they may do whatever he commands them upon the face of the habitable world.
He causes it to come, whether it be for correction, or for his land, or for loving kindness.
Hearken to this, O Job. Stand still, and consider the wondrous works of God.
Do thou know how God lays his charge upon them, and causes the lightning of his cloud to shine?
Do thou know the balancing of the clouds, the wondrous works of him who is perfect in knowledge?
How thy garments are warm when the earth is still because of the south wind?
Can thou with him spread out the sky, which is strong as a molten mirror?
Teach us what we shall say to him. We cannot set in array because of darkness.
Shall it be told him that I would speak? Or should a man wish that he were swallowed up?
And now men do not see the light which is bright in the skies, but the wind passes, and clears them.
Out of the north comes golden splendor. God has upon him awesome majesty.
O the Almighty, we cannot find him out. He is excellent in power. And in justice and abundant righteousness he will not afflict.
Men therefore fear him. He does not regard any who are wise of heart.

Then Jehovah answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said,
Who is this that darkens counsel by words without knowledge?
Gird up now thy loins like a man, for I will demand of thee, and declare thou to me.
Where were thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? Declare, if thou have understanding.
Who determined the measures of it, if thou know? Or who stretched the line upon it?
Upon what were the foundations of it fastened? Or who laid the cornerstone of it
when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?
Or who shut up the sea with doors when it broke forth, like it had issued out of the womb,
when I made clouds the garment of it, and thick darkness a swaddling-band for it,
and marked out for it my bound, and set bars and doors,
and said, This far thou shall come, but no farther, and here thy proud waves shall be stayed?
Have thou commanded the morning since thy days began, and caused the dayspring to know its place
that it might take hold of the ends of the earth, and the wicked be shaken out of it?
It is changed as clay under the seal, and all things stand forth as a garment.
And from the wicked their light is withheld, and the high arm is broken.
Have thou entered into the springs of the sea? Or have thou walked in the recesses of the deep?
Have the gates of death been revealed to thee? Or have thou seen the gates of the shadow of death?
Have thou comprehended the earth in its breadth? Declare, if thou know it all.
Where is the way to the dwelling of light? And as for darkness, where is the place of it
that thou should take it to the bound of it, and that thou should discern the paths to the house of it?
Thou know, for thou were born then, and the number of thy days is great!
Have thou entered the treasuries of the snow, or have thou seen the treasures of the hail,
which I have reserved against the time of trouble, against the day of battle and war?
By what way is the light divided, or the east wind scattered upon the earth?
Who has cleft a channel for the water flood, or the way for the lightning of the thunder,
to cause it to rain on a land where no man is, on the wilderness, in which there is no man,
to satisfy the waste and desolate ground, and to cause the tender grass to spring forth?
Has the rain a father? Or who has begotten the drops of dew?
Out of whose womb came the ice? And the hoary frost of heaven, who has engendered it?
The waters hide themselves and become like stone, and the face of the deep is frozen.
Can thou bind the cluster of the Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion?
Can thou lead forth the Mazzaroth in their season? Or can thou guide the Bear with her train?
Do thou know the ordinances of the heavens? Can thou establish the dominion of it on the earth?
Can thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance of waters may cover thee?
Can thou send forth lightnings, that they may go, and say to thee, Here we are?
Who has put wisdom in the inward parts? Or who has given understanding to the mind?
Who can number the clouds by wisdom? Or who can pour out the bottles of heaven
when the dust runs into a mass, and the clods cleave fast together?
Can thou hunt the prey for the lioness, or satisfy the appetite of the young lions
when they couch in their dens, and abide in the covert to lie in wait?
Who provides for the raven his prey when his young ones cry to God, and wander for lack of food?

Do thou know the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth? Or can thou mark when the hinds do calve?
Can thou number the months that they fulfill? Or do thou know the time when they bring forth?
They bow themselves. They bring forth their young. They cast out their pains.
Their young ones become strong. They grow up in the open field. They go forth, and return not again.
Who has sent out the wild donkey free? Or who has loosed the bonds of the swift donkey
whose home I have made the wilderness, and the salt land his dwelling-place?
He scorns the tumult of the city, neither does he hear the shoutings of the driver.
The range of the mountains is his pasture, and he searches after every green thing.
Will the wild-ox be content to serve thee? Or will he abide by thy crib?
Can thou bind the wild-ox with his band in the furrow? Or will he harrow the valleys after thee?
Will thou trust him because his strength is great? Or will thou leave to him thy labor?
Will thou confide in him that he will bring home thy seed, and gather the grain of thy threshing-floor?
The wings of the ostrich wave proudly, but are they the pinions and plumage of love?
For she leaves her eggs on the ground, and warms them in the dust.
And she forgets that the foot may crush them, or that the wild beast may trample them.
She deals hardly with her young ones, as if they were not hers. Though her labor be in vain, she is without fear,
because God has deprived her of wisdom, nor has he imparted understanding to her.
The time she lifts up herself on high she scorns the horse and his rider.
Have thou given the horse his might? Have thou clothed his neck with the quivering mane?
Have thou made him to leap as a locust? The glory of his snorting is awesome.
He paws in the valley, and rejoices in his strength. He goes out to meet the armed men.
He mocks at fear, and is not dismayed. Neither does he turn back from the sword.
The quiver rattles against him, the flashing spear and the javelin.
He swallows the ground with fierceness and rage, nor does he believe that it is the voice of the trumpet.
As often as the trumpet sounds he says, Aha! And he smells the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains, and the shouting.
Is it by thy wisdom that the hawk soars, and stretches her wings toward the south?
Is it at thy command that the eagle mounts up, and makes her nest on high?
She dwells on the cliff, and makes her home upon the point of the cliff and the stronghold.
From there she spies out the prey. Her eyes behold it afar off.
Her young ones also suck up blood. And where the slain are, there is she.

Moreover Jehovah answered Job, and said,
Shall he who quibbles contend with the Almighty? He who argues with God, let him answer it.
Then Job answered Jehovah, and said,
Behold, I am of small account. What shall I answer thee? I lay my hand upon my mouth.
I have spoken once, and I will not answer, yes, twice, but I will proceed no further.
Then Jehovah answered Job out of the whirlwind, and said,
Gird up thy loins now like a man. I will demand of thee, and declare thou to me.
Will thou even annul my judgment? Will thou condemn me, that thou may be justified?
Or have thou an arm like God? And can thou thunder with a voice like him?
Deck thyself now with excellency and dignity, and array thyself with honor and majesty.
Pour forth the overflowings of thine anger, and look upon everyone who is proud, and abase him.
Look on everyone who is proud, and bring him low, and tread down the wicked where they stand.
Hide them in the dust together. Bind their faces in the hidden place.
Then I will also confess of thee that thine own right hand can save thee.
Behold now behemoth, which I made as well as thee. He eats grass as an ox.
Lo now, his strength is in his loins, and his force is in the muscles of his belly.
He moves his tail like a cedar. The sinews of his thighs are knit together.
His bones are as tubes of brass. His limbs are like bars of iron.
He is a beginning of the ways of God. He who made him gives him his sword.
Surely the mountains bring him forth food, where all the beasts of the field play.
He lies under the lotus trees, in the covert of the reed, and the fen.
The lotus trees cover him with their shade. The willows of the brook encompass him about.
Behold, if a river overflows, he does not tremble. He is confident though a Jordan swell even to his mouth.
Shall any take him when he is on the watch, or pierce through his nose with a snare?

Can thou draw out leviathan with a fishhook, or press down his tongue with a cord?
Can thou put a rope into his nose, or pierce his jaw through with a hook?
Will he make many supplications to thee? Or will he speak soft words to thee?
Will he make a covenant with thee, that thou should take him for a servant forever?
Will thou play with him as with a bird? Or will thou bind him for thy maidens?
Will the bands make traffic of him? Will they part him among the merchants?
Can thou fill his skin with barbed irons, or his head with fish-spears?
Lay thy hand upon him. Remember the battle, and do so no more.
Behold, the hope of him is in vain. Will not a man be cast down even at the sight of him?
None is so fierce that he dare stir him up. Who then is he who can stand before me?
Who has first given to me, that I should repay him? Under the whole heaven is mine.
I will not keep silence concerning his limbs, nor his mighty strength, nor his goodly frame.
Who can strip off his outer garment? Who shall come within his jaws?
Who can open the doors of his face? Round about his teeth is terror.
His strong scales are his pride, shut up together like a close seal.
One is so near to another that no air can come between them.
They are joined one to another. They stick together, so that they cannot be parted.
His sneezings flash forth light, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the morning.
Out of his mouth go burning torches, and sparks of fire leap forth.
Out of his nostrils a smoke goes, as of a boiling pot and burning rushes.
His breath kindles coals, and a flame goes forth from his mouth.
In his neck abides strength, and terror dances before him.
The flakes of his flesh are joined together. They are firm upon him. They cannot be moved.
His heart is as firm as a stone, Yea, firm as the nether millstone.
When he raises himself up the mighty are afraid. Because of consternation they are beside themselves.
If a man lays at him with the sword it cannot avail, nor the spear, the dart, nor the pointed shaft.
He counts iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood.
The arrow cannot make him flee. Sling-stones are turned into stubble with him.
Clubs are counted as stubble. He laughs at the rushing of the javelin.
His underparts are like sharp potsherds. He spreads out as a threshing-wagon upon the mire.
He makes the deep to boil like a pot. He makes the sea like a pot of ointment.
He makes a path to shine after him. A man would think the deep to be hoary.
Upon earth there is not his like who is made without fear.
He beholds everything that is high. He is king over all the sons of pride.

Then Job answered Jehovah, and said,
I know that thou can do all things, and that no purpose of thine can be restrained.
Who is this who hides counsel without knowledge? Therefore I have uttered that which I did not understand, things too wonderful for me, which I did not know.
Hear, I beseech thee, and I will speak, I will ask of thee, and declare thou to me.
I had heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now my eye sees thee.
Therefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes.
And it was so, that, after Jehovah had spoken these words to Job, Jehovah said to Eliphaz the Temanite, My wrath is kindled against thee, and against thy two friends. For ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.
Now therefore, take to you seven bullocks and seven rams. And go to my servant Job, and offer up for yourselves a burnt offering. And my servant Job shall pray for you, for him I will accept, that I not deal with you after your folly. For ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, as my servant Job has.
So Eliphaz the Temanite and Bildad the Shuhite and Zophar the Naamathite went and did according as Jehovah commanded them, and Jehovah accepted Job.
And Jehovah turned back the captivity of Job when he prayed for his friends. And Jehovah gave Job twice as much as he had before.
Then there came to him all his brothers, and all his sisters, and all those who had been of his acquaintance before, and ate bread with him in his house. And they bemoaned him, and comforted him concerning all the evil that Jehovah had brought upon him. Each man also gave him a piece of money, and each one a ring of gold.
So Jehovah blessed the latter end of Job more than his beginning. And he had fourteen thousand sheep, and six thousand camels, and a thousand yoke of oxen, and a thousand she-donkeys.
He had also seven sons and three daughters.
And he called the name of the first, Jemimah, and the name of the second, Keziah, and the name of the third, Keren-happuch.
And in all the land were no women found so fair as the daughters of Job. And their father gave them inheritance among their brothers.
And after this Job lived a hundred and forty years, and saw his sons, and his sons' sons, even four generations.
So Job died, being old and full of days.

Psalms

Blessed is the man who walks not in the counsel of the wicked, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of scoffers,
but his delight is in the law of Jehovah, and on his law he meditates day and night.
And he shall be like a tree planted by the streams of water, that brings forth its fruit in its season, whose leaf also does not wither. And whatever he does shall prosper.
The wicked are not so, but are like the chaff which the wind drives away.
Therefore the wicked shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the righteous.
For Jehovah knows the way of the righteous, but the way of the wicked shall perish.

Why do the nations rage, and the peoples meditate vain things?
The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against Jehovah, and against his anointed, saying,
Let us break their bonds apart, and cast away their cords from us.
He who sits in the heavens will laugh. The Lord will have them in derision.
Then he will speak to them in his wrath, and vex them in his great displeasure.
Yet I have set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.
I will tell of the decree. Jehovah said to me, Thou are my Son, this day I have begotten thee.
Ask of me, and I will give thee the nations for thine inheritance, and the outermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel.
Now therefore be wise, O ye kings. Be instructed, ye judges of the earth.
Serve Jehovah with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish in the way, for his wrath will soon be kindled. Blessed are all those who take refuge in him.

Jehovah, how my adversaries are increased! Many are those who rise up against me.
Many there are who say of my soul, There is no help for him in God. Selah.
But thou, O Jehovah, are a shield about me, my glory and he who lifts up of my head.
I cry to Jehovah with my voice, and he answers me out of his holy hill. Selah.
I laid down and slept. I awoke, for Jehovah sustains me.
I will not be afraid of ten thousands of the people who have set themselves against me round about.
Arise, O Jehovah. Save me, O my God. For thou have smitten all my enemies upon the cheek bone. Thou have broken the teeth of the wicked.
Salvation belongs to Jehovah. Thy blessing be upon thy people. Selah.

Answer me when I call, O God of my righteousness. Thou have enlarged me in distress. Have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.
O ye sons of men, how long shall my glory be turned into dishonor? Will ye love vanity, and seek after falsehood? Selah.
But know that Jehovah has set apart for himself him who is holy. Jehovah will hear when I call to him.
Stand in awe, and sin not. Commune with your own heart upon your bed, and be still. Selah.
Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put your trust in Jehovah.
Many there are who say, Who will show us good? Jehovah, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us.
Thou have put gladness in my heart more than when their grain and their new wine are increased.
In peace I will both lie down and sleep, for thou, Jehovah, alone make me dwell in safety.

Give ear to my words, O Jehovah, Consider my meditation.
Hearken to the voice of my cry, my King, and my God, for to thee do I pray.
O Jehovah, in the morning thou shall hear my voice. In the morning I will direct to thee, and will keep watch.
For thou are not a God who has pleasure in wickedness. Evil shall not sojourn with thee.
The arrogant shall not stand in thy sight. Thou hate all workers of iniquity.
Thou will destroy those who speak lies. Jehovah abhors the blood-thirsty and deceitful man.
But as for me, in the abundance of thy loving kindness I will come into thy house. In thy fear I will worship toward thy holy temple.
Lead me, O Jehovah, in thy righteousness because of my enemies. Make thy way straight before my face.
For there is no faithfulness in their mouth. Their inward part is very wickedness. Their throat is an open sepulcher. With their tongue they deceive.
Hold them guilty, O God. Let them fall by their own counsels. Thrust them out in the multitude of their transgressions. For they have rebelled against thee.
But let all those who take refuge in thee rejoice. Let them ever shout for joy, because thou defend them. Let those also who love thy name be joyful in thee.
For thou will bless the righteous man, O Jehovah. Thou will encompass him with favor as with a shield. Selah.

O Jehovah, rebuke me not in thine anger, nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah, for I am withered away. O Jehovah, heal me, for my bones are troubled.
My soul also is greatly troubled. And thou, O Jehovah, how long?
Return, O Jehovah, deliver my soul. Save me for thy loving kindness' sake.
For in death there is no remembrance of thee. In Sheol who shall give thee thanks?
I am weary with my groaning. Every night I make my bed to swim. I water my couch with my tears.
My eye wastes away because of grief. It grows old because of all my adversaries.
Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity, for Jehovah has heard the voice of my weeping.
Jehovah has heard my supplication. Jehovah will receive my prayer.
All my enemies shall be put to shame and greatly troubled. They shall turn back. They shall be put to shame suddenly.

O Jehovah my God, in thee do I take refuge. Save me from all those who pursue me, and deliver me,
lest they tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to deliver.
O Jehovah my God, if I have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands,
if I have rewarded evil to him who was at peace with me, (yea, I have delivered him without cause who was my adversary),
let the enemy pursue my soul, and overtake it. Yea, let him tread my life down to the earth, and lay my glory in the dust. Selah.
Arise, O Jehovah, in thine anger. Lift up thyself against the rage of my adversaries, and awake for me the justice thou have commanded.
And let the congregation of the peoples encompass thee about, and return thou on high over them.
Jehovah shall judge the peoples. Judge me, O Jehovah, according to my righteousness, and to my integrity that is in me.
O let the wickedness of the wicked man come to an end, but establish thou the righteous man. For the righteous God tries the minds and hearts.
My shield is with God, who saves the upright in heart.
God is a righteous judge. Yea, a God who has indignation every day.
If a man does not repent, he will whet his sword. He has bent his bow, and made it ready.
He has also prepared for him the instruments of death. He makes his arrows fiery.
Behold the wicked man, he travails with iniquity. Yea, he has conceived mischief, and brought forth falsehood.
He has made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch which he made.
His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his violence shall come down upon his own scalp.
I will give thanks to Jehovah according to his righteousness, and will sing praise to the name of Jehovah Most High.

O Jehovah, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth, who has set thy glory upon the heavens!
Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have perfected praise, because of thine adversaries, that thou might still the enemy and the avenger.
When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the stars, which thou have ordained,
what is man that thou remember him? And the son of man that thou succor him?
For thou have made him but little lower than agents, and crowned him with glory and honor.
Thou make him to have dominion over the works of thy hands. Thou have put all things under his feet.
All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the field,
the birds of the heavens, and the fish of the sea, whatever passes through the paths of the seas.
O Jehovah, our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!

I will give thanks to Jehovah with my whole heart. I will show forth all thy marvelous works.
I will be glad and exult in thee. I will sing praise to thy name, O thou Most High.
When my enemies turn back, they stumble and perish at thy presence.
For thou have maintained my right and my cause. Thou sit in the throne judging righteously.
Thou have rebuked the nations. Thou have destroyed the wicked. Thou have blotted out their name forever and ever.
The enemy have come to an end. They are desolate forever, and the cities which thou have overthrown. The very memory of them is perished,
but Jehovah will endure forever. He has prepared his throne for judgment,
and he will judge the world in righteousness. He will minister justice to the peoples in uprightness.
Jehovah will also be a high tower for the oppressed, a high tower in times of trouble.
And those who know thy name will put their trust in thee, for thou, Jehovah, have not forsaken those who seek thee.
Sing praises to Jehovah, who dwells in Zion. Declare among the people his doings.
For he who makes inquiry for blood remembers them. He does not forget the cry of the poor.
Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah. Behold my affliction from those who hate me, thou who lifts me up from the gates of death
that I may show forth all thy praise. In the gates of the daughter of Zion I will rejoice in thy salvation.
The nations are sunk down in the pit that they made. In the net which they hid, their own foot is taken.
Jehovah has made himself known. He has executed justice. The wicked man is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.
Wicked men shall be turned back to Sheol, even all the nations that forget God.
For a needy man shall not always be forgotten, nor the expectation of the poor perish forever.
Arise, O Jehovah, let not man prevail. Let the nations be judged in thy sight.
Put them in fear, O Jehovah. Let the nations know themselves to be but men. Selah.

Why do thou stand afar off, O Jehovah? Why do thou hide thyself in times of trouble?
In the pride of the wicked man the poor man is hotly pursued. Let them be taken in the devices that they have conceived.
For the wicked man boasts of his heart's desire. And the greedy man renounces, yea, despises Jehovah.
The wicked man, in the pride of his countenance, says, He will not require it. All his thoughts are, There is no God.
His ways are profane at all times. Thy judgments are far above out of his sight. As for all his adversaries, he puffs at them.
He says in his heart, I shall not be moved. To all generations I shall not be in adversity.
His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and oppression. Under his tongue is mischief and iniquity.
He sits in the lurking-places of the villages. In the covert places he murders the innocent man. His eyes are secretly set against the poor man.
He lurks in secret as a lion in his covert. He lies in wait to catch the poor man. He catches the poor man when he draws him in his net.
He crouches, he bows down, and helpless men fall by his strong men.
He says in his heart, God has forgotten. He hides his face. He will never see it.
Arise, O Jehovah, O God, lift up thy hand. Do not forget the poor.
Why does the wicked man despise God, and say in his heart, Thou will not require it?
Thou have seen. For thou behold mischief and spite, to repay with thy hand. The poor man commits himself to thee. Thou have been the helper of the fatherless.
Break thou the arm of the sinner and the evil man. His wickedness shall be sought, and shall not be found.
Jehovah is King forever and ever. The nations have perished out of his land.
Jehovah, thou have heard the desire of the humble. Thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear to hear,
to judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that man who is of the earth may no more be terrible.

In Jehovah I take refuge. How will ye say to my soul, Flee as a bird to your mountain.
For, lo, the wicked bend the bow. They make ready their arrow upon the string that they may shoot in darkness at the upright in heart.
If the foundations be destroyed, what can a righteous man do?
Jehovah is in his holy temple. Jehovah's throne is in heaven. His eyes, behold, his eyelids try, the sons of men.
Jehovah tries the righteous man, but his soul hates the wicked man and him who loves violence.
He will rain snares upon sinners. Fire and brimstone and burning wind shall be the portion of their cup.
For Jehovah is righteous. He loves righteousness. The upright man shall behold his face.

Help, Jehovah, for the holy man ceases, for the faithful fail from among the sons of men.
They speak falsehood everyone with his neighbor. With flattering lip, and with a double heart, they speak.
Jehovah will cut off all flattering lips, the tongue that speaks great things,
who have said, With our tongue will we prevail. Our lips are our own. Who is lord over us?
Because of the oppression of the poor, because of the sighing of the needy, now I will arise, says Jehovah. I will set him in the safety he gasps for.
The words of Jehovah are pure words, as silver tried in a furnace on the earth, purified seven times.
Thou will keep them, O Jehovah. Thou will preserve them from this generation forever.
The wicked walk on every side when vileness is exalted among the sons of men.

How long, O Jehovah? Will thou forget me forever? How long will thou hide thy face from me?
How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart all the day? How long shall my enemy be exalted over me?
Consider and answer me, O Jehovah my God. Lighten my eyes, lest I sleep the death,
lest my enemy say, I have prevailed against him, lest my adversaries rejoice when I am moved.
But I have trusted in thy loving kindness. My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.
I will sing to Jehovah because he has dealt bountifully with me.

The fool has said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt. They have done abominable works. There is none that does good.
Jehovah looked down from heaven upon the sons of men to see if there were any who understood, who sought after God.
They are all gone aside. They are together become filthy. There is none who does good, no, not one.
Have all the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon Jehovah?
There they were in great fear, for God is in the generation of the righteous.
Ye put to shame the counsel of the poor because Jehovah is his refuge.
O that the salvation of Israel came out of Zion! When Jehovah brings back the captivity of his people, then Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Jehovah, who shall sojourn in thy tabernacle? Who shall dwell in thy holy hill?
He who walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks truth in his heart,
he who does no slander with his tongue, nor does evil to his friend, nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor,
in whose eyes a reprobate is despised, but who honors those who fear Jehovah, he that swears to his own hurt, and changes not,
he who puts not his money out to interest, nor takes a bribe against the innocent. He who does these things shall never be moved.

Preserve me, O God, for in thee do I take refuge.
Thou my soul have said to Jehovah, Thou are my Lord. I have no good beyond thee.
As for the sanctified who are in the earth, they are the excellent in whom is all my delight.
Their sorrows shall be multiplied who give gifts for another god. Their drink offerings of blood I will not offer, nor take their names upon my lips.
Jehovah is the portion of my inheritance and of my cup. Thou maintain my lot.
The lines are fallen to me in pleasant places. Yea, I have a fine heritage.
I will bless Jehovah, who has given me counsel. Yea, my heart instructs me in the night seasons.
I beheld Jehovah always before me. Because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoices. My flesh also shall dwell in hope.
For thou will not leave my soul to Sheol, nor will thou allow thy holy man to see corruption.
Thou made known to me the path of life. Thou will fill me of joy with thy countenance.

Hear the right, O Jehovah, attend to my cry. Give ear to my prayer, that goes not out of feigned lips.
Let my justice come forth from thy presence. Let thine eyes look upon equity.
Thou have proved my heart. Thou have visited me in the night. Thou have tried me, and find nothing. I have purposed that my mouth shall not transgress.
As for the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have kept from the ways of a violent man.
My steps have held fast to thy paths. My feet have not slipped.
I have called upon thee, for thou will answer me, O God. Incline thine ear to me, and hear my speech.
Show thy marvelous loving kindness, O thou who saves by thy right hand those who take refuge from those who rise up.
Keep me as the apple of the eye. Hide me under the shadow of thy wings,
from the wicked who oppress me, my deadly enemies, who encompass me around.
They are enclosed in their own fat. With their mouth they speak proudly.
They have now encompassed us in our steps. They set their eyes to cast down to the earth.
He is like a lion that is greedy of his prey, and as it were a young lion lurking in secret places.
Arise, O Jehovah, confront him. Cast him down. Deliver my soul from the wicked by thy sword,
from men by thy hand, O Jehovah, from men of the world whose portion is in this life, and whose belly thou fill with thy treasure. They are satisfied with sons, and leave the rest of their substance to their babes.
As for me, I shall behold thy face in righteousness. I shall be satisfied, when I awake, with thy form.

I love thee, O Jehovah, my strength.
Jehovah is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer, my God, my rock, in whom I will take refuge, my shield, and the horn of my salvation, my high tower.
I will call upon Jehovah, who is worthy to be praised. So I shall be saved from my enemies.
The cords of death encompassed me, and the floods of lawlessness made me afraid.
The cords of Sheol were round about me. The snares of death came upon me.
In my distress I called upon Jehovah, and cried to my God. He heard my voice out of his temple, and my cry before him came into his ears.
Then the earth shook and trembled. The foundations also of the mountains quaked and were shaken because he was angry.
There went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured. Coals were kindled by it.
He also bowed the heavens, and came down, and thick darkness was under his feet.
And he rode upon a cherub, and flew. Yea, he soared upon the wings of the wind.
He made darkness his hiding-place, his pavilion round about him, darkness of waters, thick clouds of the skies.
At the brightness before him his thick clouds passed, hailstones and coals of fire.
Jehovah also thundered in the heavens, and the Most High uttered his voice, hailstones and coals of fire.
And he sent out his arrows, and scattered them, Yea, lightnings manifold, and discomfited them.
Then the channels of waters appeared, and the foundations of the world were laid bare at thy rebuke, O Jehovah, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.
He sent from on high, he took me, he drew me out of many waters.
He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from those who hated me, for they were too mighty for me.
They came upon me in the day of my calamity, but Jehovah was my stay.
He also brought me forth into a large place. He delivered me because he delighted in me.
Jehovah has rewarded me according to my righteousness. According to the cleanness of my hands he has recompensed me.
For I have kept the ways of Jehovah, and have not wickedly departed from my God.
For all his ordinances were before me, and I put not away his statutes from me.
I was also perfect with him, and I kept myself from my iniquity.
Therefore Jehovah has recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.
With the merciful thou will show thyself merciful. With the perfect man thou will show thyself perfect.
With the pure thou will show thyself pure. And with the perverse thou will show thyself contrary.
For thou will save the afflicted people, but the haughty eyes thou will bring down.
For thou will light my lamp. Jehovah my God will lighten my darkness.
For by thee I run upon a troop, and by my God I leap over a wall.
As for God, his way is perfect. The word of Jehovah is tried. He is a shield to all those who take refuge in him.
For who is God, except Jehovah? And who is a rock, besides our God,
the God who girds me with strength, and makes my way perfect?
He makes my feet like hinds' feet, and sets me upon my high places.
He teaches my hands to war, so that my arms bend a bow of brass.
Thou have also given me the shield of thy salvation, and thy right hand has held me up, and thy gentleness has made me great.
Thou have enlarged my steps under me, and my feet have not slipped.
I will pursue my enemies, and overtake them. Neither will I turn again till they are consumed.
I will smite them through, so that they shall not be able to rise. They shall fall under my feet.
For thou have girded me with strength to the battle. Thou have subdued under me those who rose up against me.
Thou have also made my enemies turn their backs to me, that I might cut off those who hate me.
They cried, but there was none to save, even to Jehovah, but he answered them not.
Then I beat them small as the dust before the wind. I cast them out as the mire of the streets.
Thou have delivered me from the strivings of the people. Thou have made me the head of the nations. A people whom I have not known shall serve me.
As soon as they hear of me they shall obey me. The foreigners shall submit themselves to me.
The foreigners shall fade away, and shall come trembling out of their close places.
Jehovah lives, and blessed be my rock, and exalted be the God of my salvation,
even the God who executes vengeance for me, and subdues peoples under me.
He rescues me from my enemies. Yea, thou lift me up above those who rise up against me. Thou deliver me from the violent man.
Therefore I will give thanks to thee, O Jehovah, among the Gentiles, and will sing praises to thy name.
He gives great deliverance to his king, and shows loving kindness to his anointed, to David and to his seed, for evermore.

The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his handiwork.
Day to day utters speech, and night to night shows knowledge.
There is no speech nor language in which their voice is not heard.
Their line has gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world. In them he has set a tabernacle for the sun,
which is as a bridegroom coming out of his chamber, and rejoices as a strong man to run his course.
His going forth is from the end of the heavens, and his circuit to the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from the heat of it.
The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul. The testimony of Jehovah is sure, making a simple man wise.
The precepts of Jehovah are right, rejoicing the heart. The commandment of Jehovah is pure, enlightening the eyes.
The fear of Jehovah is clean, enduring forever. The ordinances of Jehovah are true, and righteous altogether.
More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much fine gold. Sweeter also than honey and the droppings of the honeycomb.
Moreover by them thy servant is warned. In keeping them there is great reward.
Who can discern his errors? Clear thou me from hidden faults.
Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins. Let them not have dominion over me. Then I shall be upright, and I shall be clear from great transgression.
Let the words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Jehovah, my rock, and my redeemer.

Jehovah answer thee in the day of trouble. The name of the God of Jacob set thee up on high,
send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion,
remember all thy offerings, and accept thy burnt-sacrifice (Selah),
grant thee thy heart's desire, and fulfill all thy counsel.
We will triumph in thy salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up our banners. Jehovah fulfill all thy petitions.
Now I know that Jehovah saves his anointed. He will answer him from his holy heaven with the saving strength of his right hand.
Some trust in chariots, and some in horses, but we will make mention of the name of Jehovah our God.
They are bowed down and fallen, but we are risen, and stand upright.
Save, Jehovah! Let the King answer us when we call.

The king shall joy in thy strength, O Jehovah. And in thy salvation how greatly he shall rejoice!
Thou have given him his heart's desire, and have not withheld the request of his lips. Selah.
For thou meet him with the blessings of goodness. Thou set a crown of fine gold on his head.
He asked life from thee. Thou gave it him, even length of days forever and ever.
His glory is great in thy salvation. Honor and majesty thou do lay upon him.
For thou make him most blessed forever. Thou make him glad with joy in thy presence.
For the king trusts in Jehovah. And through the loving kindness of the Most High he shall not be moved.
Thy hand will find out all thine enemies. Thy right hand will find out those who hate thee.
Thou will make them as a fiery furnace in the time of thine anger. Jehovah will swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour them.
Thou will destroy their fruit from the earth, and their seed from among the sons of men.
For they intended evil against thee. They conceived a device which they are not able to perform.
For thou will make them turn their back. Thou will make ready with thy bowstrings against their face.
Be thou exalted, O Jehovah, in thy strength. We will sing and praise thy power.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, far from helping me, and the words of my groaning?
O my God, I cry in the daytime, but thou answer not, and in the night season, and I am not silent.
But thou are holy, O thou who inhabit the praises of Israel.
Our fathers trusted in thee. They trusted, and thou delivered them.
They cried to thee, and were delivered. They trusted in thee, and were not put to shame.
But I am a worm, and no man, a reproach of men, and despised by the people.
All those who see me laugh me to scorn. They shoot out the lip. They shake the head, saying,
He trusted on Jehovah. Let him deliver him. Let him rescue him, since he delights in him.
But thou are he who took me out of the womb. Thou made me trust upon my mother's breasts.
I was cast upon thee from the womb. Thou are my God since my mother bore me.
Be not far from me, for trouble is near, for there is none to help.
Many bulls have encompassed me. Strong bulls of Bashan have beset me around.
They gape upon me with their mouth, as a ravening and a roaring lion.
I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint. My heart is like wax; it is melted within me.
My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue clings to my jaws, and thou have brought me into the dust of death.
For dogs have encompassed me. A company of evildoers have enclosed me. They pierced my hands and my feet.
I may count all my bones. They look and stare upon me.
They part my garments among them, and upon my vesture do they cast a lot.
But be thou not far off, O Jehovah. O thou my succor, hasten thee to help me.
Deliver my soul from the sword, the only one of me from the power of the dog.
Save me from the lion's mouth, yea, from the horns of the wild-oxen. Thou have answered me.
I will declare thy name to my brothers. In the midst of the congregation I will praise thee.
Ye who fear Jehovah, praise him. All ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him, and stand in awe of him, all ye the seed of Israel.
For he has not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted, neither has he hid his face from him, but when he cried to him, he heard.
From thee comes my praise in the great assembly. I will pay my vows before those who fear him.
The meek shall eat and be satisfied. They shall praise Jehovah who seek after him. Let your heart live forever.
All the ends of the earth shall remember and turn to Jehovah, and all the kinfolk of the nations shall worship before thee.
For the kingdom is Jehovah's, and he is the ruler over the nations.
All the fat ones of the earth shall eat and worship. All those who go down to the dust shall bow before him, even he who cannot keep his soul alive.
A seed shall serve him. It shall be told of the Lord to the next generation.
They shall come and shall declare his righteousness to a people that shall be born, that he has done it.

Jehovah is my shepherd, I shall not want.
He makes me to lie down in green pastures. He leads me beside still waters.
He restores my soul. He guides me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake.
Yea, tho I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou are with me, thy rod and thy staff, they comfort me.
Thou prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemies. Thou have anointed my head with oil. My cup runs over.
Surely goodness and loving kindness shall follow me all the days of my life, and I shall dwell in the house of Jehovah forever.

The earth is Jehovah's, and the fullness thereof, the world, and those who dwell therein.
For he has founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods.
Who shall ascend into the hill of Jehovah? And who shall stand in his holy place?
He who has clean hands, and a pure heart, who has not lifted up his soul to falsehood, and has not sworn deceitfully.
He shall receive a blessing from Jehovah, and righteousness from the God of his salvation.
This is the generation of those who seek after him, who seek thy face, even Jacob. Selah.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates, and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory will come in.
Who is the King of glory? Jehovah strong and mighty, Jehovah mighty in battle.
Lift up your heads, O ye gates. Yea, lift them up, ye everlasting doors, and the King of glory will come in.
Who is this King of glory? Jehovah of hosts, He is the King of glory. Selah.

To thee, O Jehovah, do I lift up my soul.
O my God, in thee I have trusted. Let me not be put to shame. Let not my enemies triumph over me.
Yea, none who wait for thee shall be put to shame. They shall be put to shame who deal treacherously without cause.
Show me thy ways, O Jehovah. Teach me thy paths.
Guide me in thy truth, and teach me. For thou are the God of my salvation. For thee do I wait all the day.
Remember, O Jehovah, thy tender mercies and thy loving kindness. For they have been ever of old.
Remember not the sins of my youth, nor my transgressions. According to thy loving kindness remember thou me, for thy goodness' sake, O Jehovah.
Good and upright is Jehovah. Therefore he will instruct sinners in the way.
The meek he will guide in justice, and the meek he will teach his way.
All the paths of Jehovah are loving kindness and truth to such as keep his covenant and his testimonies.
For thy name's sake, O Jehovah, pardon my iniquity, for it is great.
What man is he who fears Jehovah? Him he shall instruct in the way that he shall choose.
His soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the land.
The friendship of Jehovah is with those who fear him, and he will show them his covenant.
My eyes are ever toward Jehovah, for he will pluck my feet out of the net.
Turn thee to me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and afflicted.
The troubles of my heart are enlarged. O bring thou me out of my distresses.
Consider my affliction and my travail, and forgive all my sins.
Consider my enemies, for they are many. And they hate me with cruel hatred.
O keep my soul, and deliver me. Let me not be put to shame, for I take refuge in thee.
Let integrity and uprightness preserve me, for I wait for thee.
Redeem Israel, O God, out of all of his troubles.

Judge me, O Jehovah, for I have walked in my integrity. I have also trusted in Jehovah without wavering.
Examine me, O Jehovah, and prove me. Try my heart and my mind.
For thy loving kindness is before my eyes, and I have walked in thy truth.
I have not sat with men of falsehood, nor will I go in with dissemblers.
I hate the assembly of evildoers, and will not sit with the wicked.
I will wash my hands in innocence, so I will encompass thine altar, O Jehovah,
that I may make the voice of thanksgiving to be heard, and tell of all thy wondrous works.
Jehovah, I love the habitation of thy house, and the place where thy glory dwells.
Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with men of blood,
in whose hands is wickedness, and their right hand is full of bribes.
But as for me, I will walk in my integrity. Redeem me, and be merciful to me.
My foot stands in an even place. In the congregations I will bless Jehovah.

Jehovah is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear? Jehovah is the strength of my life, of whom shall I be afraid?
When evildoers came upon me to eat up my flesh, even my adversaries and my foes, they stumbled and fell.
Though an army should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear. Though war should rise against me, even then I will be confident.
One thing I have asked of Jehovah, that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of Jehovah all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of Jehovah, and to inquire in his temple.
For in the day of trouble he will hide me in his pavilion. In the covert of his tabernacle he will hide me. He will lift me up upon a rock.
And now my head shall be lifted up above my enemies round about me. And I will offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy. I will sing, yea, I will sing praises to Jehovah.
Hear, O Jehovah, when I cry with my voice. Have mercy also upon me, and answer me.
My heart said to thee, I have sought thy face. O Jehovah, I will seek thy face.
Hide not thy face from me. Put not thy servant away in anger. Thou have been my help. Cast me not off, nor forsake me, O God of my salvation.
When my father and my mother forsake me, then Jehovah will take me up.
Teach me thy way, O Jehovah, and lead me in a plain path, because of my enemies.
Deliver me not over to the will of my adversaries. For false witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty.
I believe that I shall see the goodness of Jehovah in the land of the living.
Wait for Jehovah. Be strong, and let thy heart take courage. Yea, wait thou for Jehovah.

To thee, O Jehovah, I will call. My rock, be not thou deaf to me, lest, if thou be silent to me, I become like those who go down into the pit.
Hear the voice of my supplications when I cry to thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy holy oracle.
Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity, who speak peace with their neighbors, but mischief is in their hearts.
Give them according to their work, and according to the wickedness of their doings. Give them after the operation of their hands. Render to them their recompense,
because they regard not the works of Jehovah, nor the operation of his hands. He will break them down and not build them up.
Blessed be Jehovah, because he has heard the voice of my supplications.
Jehovah is my strength and my shield. My heart has trusted in him, and I am helped. Therefore my heart greatly rejoices, and with my song I will praise him.
Jehovah is their strength, and he is a stronghold of salvation to his anointed.
Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance. Be their shepherd also, and bear them up forever.

Ascribe to Jehovah, O ye sons of the mighty, ascribe to Jehovah glory and strength.
Ascribe to Jehovah the glory due to his name. Worship Jehovah in holy array.
The voice of Jehovah is upon the waters. The God of glory thunders, even Jehovah upon many waters.
The voice of Jehovah is powerful. The voice of Jehovah is full of majesty.
The voice of Jehovah breaks the cedars. Yea, Jehovah breaks in pieces the cedars of Lebanon.
He makes them also to skip like a calf, Lebanon and Sirion like a young wild-ox.
The voice of Jehovah splits the flames of fire.
The voice of Jehovah shakes the wilderness. Jehovah shakes the wilderness of Kadesh.
The voice of Jehovah makes the hinds to calve, and strips the forests bare. And in his temple everything says, Glory.
Jehovah sat as King at the Flood. Yea, Jehovah sits as King forever.
Jehovah will give strength to his people. Jehovah will bless his people with peace.

I will extol thee, O Jehovah, for thou have raised me up, and have not made my foes to rejoice over me.
O Jehovah my God, I cried to thee, and thou have healed me.
O Jehovah, thou have brought up my soul from Sheol. Thou have kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.
Sing praise to Jehovah, O ye sanctified of his, and give thanks to his holiness.
For his anger is but for a moment. His favor is for a lifetime. Weeping may tarry for the night, but joy is in the morning.
As for me, I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved.
Thou, Jehovah, of thy favor had made my mountain to stand strong. Thou hid thy face; I was troubled.
I cried to thee, O Jehovah, and to Jehovah I made supplication.
What profit is there in my blood when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust praise thee? Shall it declare thy truth?
Hear, O Jehovah, and have mercy upon me. Jehovah, be thou my helper.
Thou have turned for me my mourning into dancing. Thou have loosed my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness,
to the end that my glory may sing praise to thee, and not be silent. O Jehovah my God, I will give thanks to thee forever.

In thee, O Jehovah, do I take refuge. Let me never be put to shame. Deliver me in thy righteousness.
Bow down thine ear to me. Deliver me speedily. Be thou to me a strong rock, a house of defense to save me.
For thou are my rock and my fortress. Therefore for thy name's sake lead me and guide me.
Pluck me out of the net that they have laid secretly for me, for thou are my stronghold.
Into thy hand I commend my spirit. Thou have redeemed me, O Jehovah, thou God of truth.
I hate those who regard lying vanities, but I trust in Jehovah.
I will be glad and rejoice in thy loving kindness, for thou have seen my affliction. Thou have known my soul in adversities,
and thou have not shut me up into the hand of the enemy. Thou have set my feet in a large place.
Have mercy upon me, O Jehovah, for I am in distress. My eye wastes away with grief, yea, my soul and my body.
For my life is spent with sorrow, and my years with sighing. My strength fails because of my iniquity, and my bones are wasted away.
I have become a reproach because of all my adversaries, yea, to my neighbors exceedingly, and a fear to my acquaintances. Those who saw me outside fled from me.
I am forgotten as a dead man out of mind. I am like a broken vessel.
For I have heard the slander of many. Fear was on every side, while they took counsel together against me. They devised to take away my life.
But I trusted in thee, O Jehovah. I said, Thou are my God.
My times are in thy hand. Deliver me from the hand of my enemies, and from those who persecute me.
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant. Save me in thy loving kindness.
Let me not be put to shame, O Jehovah, for I have called upon thee. Let the wicked be put to shame. Let them be silent in Sheol.
Let the lying lips be dumb, which speak against the righteous man insolently, with pride and contempt.
O how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up for those who fear thee, which thou have wrought for those who take refuge in thee before the sons of men!
In the covert of thy presence thou will hide them from the plotting of man. Thou will keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife of tongues.
Blessed be Jehovah, for he has shown me his marvelous loving kindness in a strong city.
As for me, I said in my haste, I am cut off from before thine eyes. Nevertheless thou heard the voice of my supplications when I cried to thee.
O love Jehovah, all ye his sanctified. Jehovah preserves the faithful, and plentifully repays him who deals proudly.
Be strong, and let your heart take courage, all ye who hope in Jehovah.

Blessed are those whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered.
Blessed is the man to whom Jehovah does not impute sin, and in whose spirit there is no deceit.
When I kept silence, my bones wasted away through my groaning all the day long.
For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me. My moisture was changed as with the drought of summer. Selah.
I acknowledged my sin to thee, and I did not hide my iniquity. I said, I will confess my transgressions to Jehovah, and thou forgave the iniquity of my sin. Selah.
For this let everyone who is devout pray to thee in a time when thou may be found. Surely when the great waters overflow they shall not reach to him.
Thou are my hiding-place. Thou will preserve me from trouble. Thou will encompass me around with songs of deliverance. Selah.
I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shall go. I will counsel thee with my eye upon thee.
Become ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no understanding, whose trappings must be bit and bridle to hold them in, else they will not come near to thee.
Many sorrows shall be to the wicked, but he who trusts in Jehovah, loving kindness shall encompass him about.
Be glad in Jehovah, and rejoice, ye righteous. And shout for joy, all ye who are upright in heart.

Rejoice in Jehovah, O ye righteous. Praise is comely for the upright.
Give thanks to Jehovah with the harp. Sing praises to him with the psaltery of ten strings.
Sing to him a new song. Play skillfully with a loud noise.
For the word of Jehovah is right, and all his work is done in faithfulness.
He loves righteousness and justice. The earth is full of the loving kindness of Jehovah.
By the word of Jehovah were the heavens made, and all the host of them by the breath of his mouth.
He gathers the waters of the sea together as a heap. He lays up the deeps in store-houses.
Let all the earth fear Jehovah. Let all the inhabitants of the world stand in awe of him.
For he spoke, and it was done. He commanded, and it stood fast.
Jehovah brings the counsel of the nations to naught. He makes the thoughts of the peoples to be of no effect.
The counsel of Jehovah stands fast forever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations.
Blessed is the nation whose God is Jehovah, the people whom he has chosen for his own inheritance.
Jehovah looks from heaven. He beholds all the sons of men.
From the place of his habitation he looks forth upon all the inhabitants of the earth;
he who fashions the hearts of them all, who considers all their works.
There is no king saved by the multitude of an army. A mighty man is not delivered by great strength.
A horse is a vain thing for safety, nor does he deliver any by his great power.
Behold, the eye of Jehovah is upon those who fear him, upon those who hope in his loving kindness,
to deliver their soul from death, and to keep them alive in famine.
Our soul has waited for Jehovah. He is our help and our shield.
For our heart shall rejoice in him because we have trusted in his holy name.
Let thy loving kindness, O Jehovah, be upon us, according as we have hoped in thee.

I will bless Jehovah at all times. His praise shall continually be in my mouth.
My soul shall make its boast in Jehovah. The humble shall hear of it, and be glad.
O magnify Jehovah with me, and let us exalt his name together.
I sought Jehovah, and he answered me, and delivered me from all my fears.
They looked to him, and were radiant, and their faces shall never be confounded.
This poor man cried, and Jehovah heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles.
The agent of Jehovah encamps round about those who fear him, and delivers them.
O taste and see that Jehovah is good. Blessed is the man who takes refuge in him.
O fear Jehovah, ye his sanctified, for there is no want to those who fear him.
The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger, but those who seek Jehovah shall not want any good thing.
Come, ye children, hearken to me. I will teach you the fear of Jehovah.
What man is he who desires life, and loves many days, that he may see good?
Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking deceit.
Depart from evil, and do good. Seek peace, and pursue it.
The eyes of Jehovah are toward the righteous, and his ears are open to their prayer.
(The face of Jehovah is against those who do evil, to cut off the remembrance of them from the earth.)
They cried, and Jehovah heard, and delivered them out of all their troubles.
Jehovah is near to those who are of a broken heart, and saves such as are of a contrite spirit.
Many are the afflictions of the righteous, but Jehovah delivers him out of them all.
He keeps all his bones. Not one of them is broken.
Evil shall kill the wicked, and those who hate the righteous shall be condemned.
Jehovah redeems the soul of his servants, and none of those who take refuge in him shall be condemned.

Strive thou, O Jehovah, with those who strive with me. Fight thou against those who fight against me.
Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for my help.
Draw out the spear also, and stop the way against those who pursue me. Say to my soul, I am thy salvation.
Let them be put to shame and brought to dishonor who seek after my soul. Let them be turned back and confounded who devise my hurt.
Let them be as chaff before the wind, and the agent of Jehovah driving them on.
Let their way be dark and slippery, and the agent of Jehovah pursuing them.
For without cause they have hid their net for me in a pit. Without cause they have dug a pit for my soul.
Let destruction come upon him unawares, and let his net that he has hid catch himself. Let him fall in it with destruction.
And my soul shall be joyful in Jehovah. It shall rejoice in his salvation.
All my bones shall say, Jehovah, who is like thee, who delivers a poor man from him who is too strong for him, yea, a poor and needy man from him who robs him?
Unrighteous witnesses rise up, they ask me of things that I know not.
They reward me evil for good, to the bereaving of my soul.
But as for me, when they were sick my clothing was sackcloth. I afflicted my soul with fasting, and my prayer returned into my own bosom.
I behaved myself as though it had been my friend or my brother. I bowed down mourning, as he who bewails his mother.
But in my adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together. The wretches gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not. They tore me, and ceased not.
Like the profane mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with their teeth.
Lord, how long will thou look on? Rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from the lions.
I will give thee thanks in the great assembly. I will praise thee among much people.
Let not those who are my enemies wrongfully rejoice over me. Neither let them wink with the eye who hate me without a cause.
For they speak not peace, but they devise deceitful words against those who are quiet in the land.
Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me. They said, Aha, aha, our eye has seen it.
Thou have seen it, O Jehovah. Keep not silence. O Lord, be not far from me.
Stir up thyself, and awake to the justice to me, to my cause, my God and my Lord.
Judge me, O Jehovah my God, according to thy righteousness, and let them not rejoice over me.
Let them not say in their heart, Aha, so would we have it. Let them not say, We have swallowed him up.
Let them be put to shame and confounded together who rejoice at my hurt. Let them be clothed with shame and dishonor who magnify themselves against me.
Let them shout for joy, and be glad, who favor my righteous cause. Yea, let them say continually, Jehovah be magnified, who has pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.
And my tongue shall talk of thy righteousness and of thy praise all the day long.

The transgression of the wicked man says within my heart, There is no fear of God before his eyes.
For he flatters himself in his own eyes, that his iniquity will not be found out and be hated.
The words of his mouth are iniquity and deceit. He has ceased to be wise and to do good.
He devises iniquity upon his bed. He sets himself in a way that is not good. He does not abhor evil.
Thy loving kindness, O Jehovah, is in the heavens, thy faithfulness to the skies.
Thy righteousness is like the mountains of God. Thy judgments are a great deep. O Jehovah, thou preserve man and beast.
How precious is thy loving kindness, O God, and the sons of men take refuge under the shadow of thy wings.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house, and thou will make them drink of the river of thy pleasures.
For with thee is the fountain of life. In thy light we shall see light.
O continue thy loving kindness to those who know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in heart.
Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of sinners drive me away.
There are the workers of iniquity fallen. They are thrust down, and shall not be able to rise.

Fret not thyself because of evildoers, nor be thou envious against those who work unrighteousness.
For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb.
Trust in Jehovah, and do good. Dwell in the land, and feed on his faithfulness.
Delight thyself also in Jehovah, and he will give thee the desires of thy heart.
Commit thy way to Jehovah. Trust also in him, and he will bring it to pass.
And he will make thy righteousness to go forth as the light, and thy justice as the noon-day.
Rest in Jehovah, and wait patiently for him. Fret not thyself because of him who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings wicked devices to pass.
Cease from anger, and forsake wrath. Fret not thyself, it tends only to evil-doing.
For evildoers shall be cut off, but those who wait for Jehovah, they shall inherit the land.
For yet a little while, and the wicked man shall not be. Yea, thou shall diligently consider his place, and he shall not be.
But the meek shall inherit the land, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.
The wicked man plots against the righteous man, and gnashes upon him with his teeth.
The Lord will laugh at him, for he sees that his day is coming.
The wicked have drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, to kill such as are upright in the way.
Their sword shall enter into their own heart, and their bows shall be broken.
Better is a little that the righteous man has than the abundance of many wicked men.
For the arms of the wicked shall be broken, but Jehovah upholds the righteous.
Jehovah knows the days of the perfect, and their inheritance shall be forever.
They shall not be put to shame in the time of evil, and in the days of famine they shall be satisfied.
they shall disintegrate; they shall disintegrate away into smoke.
The wicked man borrows, and pays not again, but the righteous man deals graciously, and gives.
For such as are blessed by him shall inherit the land, and those who are cursed by him shall be cut off.
A man's goings are established by Jehovah, and he delights in his way.
Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down, for Jehovah upholds him with his hand.
I have been young, and now am old, yet I have not seen a righteous man forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.
All the day long he deals graciously, and lends, and his seed is blessed.
Depart from evil, and do good, and dwell for evermore.
For Jehovah loves justice, and forsakes not his sanctified. They are preserved forever, but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off.
The righteous shall inherit the land, and dwell in it forever.
The mouth of a righteous man talks of wisdom, and his tongue speaks justice.
The law of his God is in his heart. None of his steps shall slide.
A wicked man watches a righteous man, and seeks to kill him.
Jehovah will not leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.
Wait for Jehovah, and keep his way, and he will exalt thee to inherit the land. When sinners are cut off, thou shall see it.
I have seen a wicked man in great power, and spreading himself like a green tree in its native soil.
But I passed by, and, lo, he was not. Yea, I sought him, but he could not be found.
Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for there is a happy end to the man of peace.
As for transgressors, they shall be destroyed together. The end of the wicked shall be cut off.
But the salvation of the righteous is of Jehovah. He is their stronghold in the time of trouble,
and Jehovah helps them, and rescues them. He rescues them from sinners, and saves them, because they have taken refuge in him.

O Jehovah, rebuke me not in thy wrath, nor chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me severely.
There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine indignation, nor is there any health in my bones because of my sin.
For my iniquities have gone over my head. As a heavy burden they are too heavy for me.
My wounds are loathsome and corrupt, because of my foolishness.
I am pained and bowed down greatly. I go mourning all the day long.
For my loins are filled with burning, and there is no soundness in my flesh.
I am faint and severely bruised. I have groaned because of the disquietness of my heart.
Lord, all my desire is before thee, and my groaning is not hid from thee.
My heart throbs, my strength fails me. As for the light of my eyes, it also is gone from me.
Those I love and my friends stand aloof from my plague, and my kinsmen stand afar off.
Those also who seek after my life lay snares for me. And those who seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and meditate deceits all the day long.
But I, as a deaf man, hear not. And I am as a mute man who opens not his mouth.
Yea, I am as a man who hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs.
For in thee, O Jehovah, do I hope. Thou will answer, O Lord my God.
For I said, Lest they rejoice over me. When my foot slips, they magnify themselves against me.
For I am ready to fall, and my sorrow is continually before me.
For I will declare my iniquity. I will be sorry for my sin.
But my enemies are energetic, and are strong, and those who hate me wrongfully are multiplied.
They also who render evil for good are adversaries to me, because I follow the thing that is good.
Forsake me not, O Jehovah. O my God, be not far from me.
Make haste to help me, O Lord, my salvation.

I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue. I will keep my mouth with a bridle while the wicked man is before me.
I was mute with silence. I held my peace, even from good, and my sorrow was stirred.
Jehovah, make me to know my end, and the measure of my days, what it is. Let me know how frail I am.
Behold, thou have made my days as handbreadths, and my life-time is as nothing before thee. Surely every man at his best condition is altogether vanity. Selah.
Surely every man walks in a shadow. Surely they are disquieted in vain. He heaps up, and knows not who shall gather them.
And now, Lord, what do I wait for? My hope is in thee.
Deliver me from all my transgressions. Make me not the reproach of the foolish.
I was mute. I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.
Remove thy stroke away from me. I am consumed by the blow of thy hand.
When thou have corrected man with rebukes for iniquity, thou make his beauty to disintegrate like a moth. Surely every man is vanity. Selah.
Hear my prayer, O Jehovah, and give ear to my cry. Keep not silent at my tears, for I am a stranger with thee, a sojourner, as all my fathers were.
O spare me, that I may recover strength before I go from here, and be no more.

I waited patiently for Jehovah, and he inclined to me, and heard my cry.
He also brought me up out of a horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and he set my feet upon a rock, and established my goings.
And he has put a new song in my mouth, even praise to our God. Many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in Jehovah.
Blessed is the man who makes Jehovah his trust, and respects not the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.
Many, O Jehovah my God, are the wonderful works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are toward us. They cannot be set in order to thee. If I would declare and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered.
Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, but a body thou have prepared for me. Whole burnt offering and sacrifice for sin thou did not require.
Then I said, Lo, I have come. In the volume of a book it is written of me.
I delight to do thy will, O my God. Yea, thy law is within my heart.
I have proclaimed glad tidings of righteousness in the great assembly. Lo, I will not refrain my lips. O Jehovah, thou know.
I have not hid thy righteousness within my heart. I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation. I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth from the great assembly.
Withhold thou not thy tender mercies from me, O Jehovah. Let thy loving kindness and thy truth continually preserve me,
for innumerable evils have encompassed me around. My iniquities have overtaken me, so that I am not able to look up. They are more than the hairs of my head, and my heart has failed me.
Be pleased, O Jehovah, to deliver me. Make haste to help me, O Jehovah.
Let them be put to shame and confounded together who seek after my soul to destroy it. Let them be turned backward and brought to dishonor who delight in my hurt.
Let them be desolate because of their shame who say to me, Aha, aha.
Let all those who seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee. Let such as love thy salvation say continually, Jehovah be magnified.
But I am poor and needy, yet the Lord thinks upon me. Thou are my help and my deliverer. Make no delay, O my God.

Blessed is he who considers a poor man. Jehovah will deliver him in the day of evil.
Jehovah will preserve him, and keep him alive, and he shall be blessed upon the earth. And thou do not deliver him to the will of his enemies.
Jehovah will support him upon the bed of languishing. Thou will make all his bed in his sickness.
I said, O Jehovah, have mercy upon me. Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee.
My enemies speak evil against me, saying, When will he die, and his name perish?
And if he comes to see me, he speaks falsehood. His heart gathers iniquity to itself. When he goes abroad, he tells it.
All who hate me whisper together against me. Against me they devise my hurt.
An evil disease, they say, clings firm to him. And now that he lies he shall rise up no more.
Yea, my own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, who ate of my bread, has lifted up his heel against me.
But thou, O Jehovah, have mercy upon me, and raise me up that I may requite them.
By this I know that thou delight in me, because my enemy does not triumph over me.
And as for me, thou uphold me in my integrity, and set me before thy face forever.
Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, from everlasting and to everlasting. Truly, and Truly.

As the hart pants after the water brooks, so my soul pants after thee, O God.
My soul thirsts for God, for the living God. When shall I come and appear before God?
My tears have been my food day and night, while they continually say to me, Where is thy God?
These things I remember, and pour out my soul within me, how I went with the throng, and led them to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise, a multitude keeping holyday.
Why are thou cast down, O my soul? And why are thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him for the help of his countenance.
O my God, my soul is cast down within me. Therefore I remember thee from the land of the Jordan, and the Hermons, from the hill Mizar.
Deep calls to deep at the noise of thy waterfalls. All thy waves and thy billows have gone over me.
Yet Jehovah will command his loving kindness in the daytime, and in the night his song shall be with me, even a prayer to the God of my life.
I will say to God my rock, Why have thou forgotten me? Why do I go mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
As with a sword in my bones, my adversaries reproach me; while they continually say to me, Where is thy God?
Why are thou cast down, O my soul? And why are thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, the help of my countenance, and my God.

Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against a profane nation. O deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man.
For thou are the God of my strength. Why have thou cast me off? Why do I go mourning because of the oppression of the enemy?
O send out thy light and thy truth. Let them lead me. Let them bring me to thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles.
Then I will go to the altar of God, to God my exceeding joy, and I will praise thee upon the harp, O God, my God.
Why are thou cast down, O my soul? And why are thou disquieted within me? Hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise him, the help of my countenance, and my God.

We have heard with our ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou did in their days, in the days of old.
Thou drove out the nations with thy hand, but thou planted them. Thou afflicted the peoples, but thou spread them abroad.
For they did not get the land in possession by their own sword, nor did their own arm save them, but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou were favorable to them.
Thou are my King, O God. Command deliverance for Jacob.
Through thee we will push down our adversaries. Through thy name we will tread them under who rise up against us.
For I will not trust in my bow, nor shall my sword save me.
But thou have saved us from our adversaries, and have put them to shame who hate us.
In God we have made our boast all the day long, and we will give thanks to thy name forever. Selah.
But now thou have cast off, and brought us to dishonor, and go not forth with our armies.
Thou make us to turn back from the adversary. And those who hate us take spoil for themselves.
Thou have made us like sheep for food, and have scattered us among the nations.
Thou sell thy people for nothing, and have not increased by their price.
Thou make us a reproach to our neighbors, a scoffing and a derision to those who are round about us.
Thou make us a byword among the nations, a shaking of the head among the peoples.
All the day long my dishonor is before me, and the shame of my face has covered me,
for the voice of him who reproaches and blasphemes, because of the enemy and the avenger.
All this has come upon us, yet we have not forgotten thee, nor have we dealt falsely in thy covenant.
Our heart is not turned back, nor have our steps declined from thy way,
that thou have greatly broken us in the place of jackals, and covered us with the shadow of death.
If we have forgotten the name of our God, or spread forth our hands to a strange god,
will not God search this out? For he knows the secrets of the heart.
Yea, for thy sake we are killed all the day long. We are accounted as sheep for the slaughter.
Awake, why do thou sleep, O Lord? Arise, cast not off forever.
Why do thou hide thy face, and forget our affliction and our oppression?
For our soul is bowed down to the dust; our body clings to the ground.
Rise up for our help, and redeem us for thy loving kindness' sake.

My heart overflows with a good matter. I speak the things which I have made concerning the king. My tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
Thou are fairer than the sons of men. Grace is poured into thy lips. Therefore God has blessed thee forever.
Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O mighty one, thy glory and thy majesty.
And in thy majesty ride on prosperously because of truth and gentleness and righteousness. And thy right hand shall teach thee awesome things.
Thine arrows are sharp. The peoples fall under thee. They are in the heart of the king's enemies.
Thy throne, O God, is forever and ever. A scepter of straightness is the scepter of thy kingdom.
Thou have loved righteousness, and hated wickedness. Therefore God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions.
All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia. Out of ivory palaces stringed instruments have made thee glad.
Kings' daughters are among thy honorable women. At thy right hand stands the queen in gold of Ophir.
Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear. Forget also thine own people, and thy father's house.
So will the king desire thy beauty, for he is thy lord, and reverence thou him.
And the daughter of Tyre shall adore him with a gift. The rich among the people shall entreat thy favor.
Inside, the king's daughter is all glorious. Her clothing is embroidered with gold.
She shall be led to the king in broidered work. The virgins, her companions who follow her, shall be brought to thee.
With gladness and rejoicing they shall be led. They shall enter into the king's palace.
Instead of thy fathers shall be thy sons, whom thou shall make rulers in all the earth.
I will make thy name to be remembered in all generations. Therefore the peoples shall give thee thanks forever and ever.

God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
Therefore we will not fear, though the earth changes, and though the mountains are shaken into the heart of the seas,
though the waters of it roar and are troubled, though the mountains tremble with the swelling of it. Selah.
There is a river, the streams of which make the city of God glad, the holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High.
God is in the midst of her. She shall not be moved. God will help her, and that right early.
The nations raged, the kingdoms were moved, he uttered his voice, the earth melted.
Jehovah of hosts is with us. The God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
Come, behold the works of Jehovah, what desolations he has made in the earth.
He makes wars to cease to the end of the earth. He breaks the bow, and cuts the spear in two. He burns the chariots in the fire.
Be still, and know that I am God. I will be exalted among the nations. I will be exalted in the earth.
Jehovah of hosts is with us. The God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

O clap your hands, all ye peoples. Shout to God with the voice of triumph.
For Jehovah Most High is awesome. He is a great King over all the earth.
He subdues peoples under us, and nations under our feet.
He chooses our inheritance for us, the glory of Jacob whom he loved. Selah.
God has gone up with a shout, Jehovah with the sound of a trumpet.
Sing praise to God, sing praises. Sing praises to our King, sing praises.
For God is the King of all the earth. Sing ye praises with understanding.
God reigns over the nations. God sits upon his holy throne.
The nobles of the peoples are gathered together, the people of the God of Abraham. For the shields of the earth belong to God. He is greatly exalted.

Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised in the city of our God, in his holy mountain.
Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King.
God has made himself known in her palaces for a refuge.
For, lo, the kings assembled themselves. They passed by together.
They saw it, then were they amazed. They were dismayed, they hastened away.
Trembling took hold of them there, pain, as of a woman in travail.
With the east wind thou break the ships of Tarshish.
As we have heard, so we have seen in the city of Jehovah of hosts, in the city of our God, God will establish it forever. Selah.
We have thought on thy loving kindness, O God, in the midst of thy temple.
As is thy name, O God, so is thy praise to the ends of the earth. Thy right hand is full of righteousness.
Let mount Zion be glad. Let the daughters of Judah rejoice because of thy judgments.
Walk about Zion, and go round about her. Number the towers of it,
mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces, that ye may tell it to the generation following.
For this God is our God forever and ever. He will be our guide even to death.

Hear this, all ye peoples. Give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world,
both low and high, rich and poor together.
My mouth shall speak wisdom, and the meditation of my heart shall be of understanding.
I will incline my ear to a proverb. I will open my dark saying upon the harp.
Why should I fear in the days of evil, when iniquity at my heels encompasses me about?
Those who trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches,
none can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him
(for the redemption of their life is costly, and it fails forever),
that he should still live always, that he should not see corruption.
For he shall see it. Wise men die. The fool and the brutish alike perish, and leave their wealth to others.
Their inward thought is that their houses are forever, their dwelling-places to all generations. They call their lands after their own names.
Even a man in splendor does not abide. He is like the beasts that perish.
This their way is their folly. Yet after them men approve their sayings. Selah.
They are appointed as a flock for Sheol. Death shall be their shepherd, and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning. And their beauty shall be for Sheol to consume, that there be no habitation for it.
But God will redeem my soul from the power of Sheol, for he will receive me. Selah.
Be not thou afraid when a man is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased.
For when he dies he shall carry nothing away. His glory shall not descend after him.
Though while he lived he blessed his soul (and men praise thee, when thou do well for thyself),
he shall go to the generation of his fathers. They shall never see the light.
A man who is in splendor, and understands not, is like the beasts that perish.

The Mighty One, God, Jehovah, has spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the sun to the going down thereof.
Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God has shone forth.
Our God comes, and does not keep silence. A fire devours before him, and it is very tempestuous round about him.
He calls to the heavens above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people.
Gather my sanctified together to me, those who have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.
And the heavens shall declare his righteousness, for God is judge himself. Selah.
Hear, O my people, and I will speak, O Israel, and I will testify to thee, I am God, even thy God.
I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, and thy burnt offerings being continually before me.
I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he-goats out of thy folds.
For every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills.
I know all the birds of the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field are mine.
If I were hungry, I would not tell thee, for the world is mine, and the fullness thereof.
Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?
Offer to God the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and pay thy vows to the Most High.
And call upon me in the day of trouble. I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.
But to the wicked man God says, What have thou to do to declare my statutes, and that thou have taken my covenant in thy mouth,
since thou hate instruction, and cast my words behind thee?
When thou saw a thief, thou consented with him, and have been partaker with adulterers.
Thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frames deceit.
Thou sit and speak against thy brother; thou slander thine own mother's son.
These things thou have done, and I kept silence. Thou thought that I was altogether such a one as thyself. But I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.
Whoever offers the sacrifice of thanksgiving glorifies me. And to him who orders his way aright I will show the salvation of God.

Have mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness. According to the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.
Wash me thoroughly from my iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
For I know my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me.
Against thee, thee only, I have sinned, and done that which is evil in thy sight, that thou may be justified when thou speak, and may prevail when thou are criticized.
Behold, I was brought forth in iniquity, and in sin my mother conceived me.
Behold, thou desire truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden part thou will make me to know wisdom.
Purify me with hyssop, and I shall be clean. Wash me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Make me to hear joy and gladness, that the bones which thou have broken may rejoice.
Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all my iniquities.
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.
Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me.
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and uphold me with a willing spirit.
Then I will teach transgressors thy ways, and sinners shall be converted to thee.
Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, thou God of my salvation. And my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness.
O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall show forth thy praise.
For thou delight not in sacrifice, else I would give it. Thou have no pleasure in burnt offering.
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit. A broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise.
Do good in thy good pleasure to Zion. Build thou the walls of Jerusalem.
Then thou will delight in the sacrifices of righteousness, in burnt offering and in whole burnt offering. Then they will offer bullocks upon thine altar.

Why boast thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? The loving kindness of God is continual.
Thy tongue devises wickedness, like a sharp razor, working deceitfully.
Thou love evil more than good, and lying rather than to speak righteousness. Selah.
Thou love all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.
God will likewise destroy thee forever. He will take thee up, and pluck thee out of thy tent, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah.
The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him, saying,
Lo, this is the man who did not make God his strength, but trusted in the abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.
But as for me, I am like a green olive tree in the house of God. I trust in the loving kindness of God forever and ever.
I will give thee thanks forever, because thou have done it. And I will hope in thy name in the presence of thy sanctified, for it is good.

The fool has said in his heart, There is no God. Corrupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity. There is none who does good.
God looked down from heaven upon the sons of men, to see if there were any who understood, who seek after God.
Every one of them has gone back. They have together become filthy. There is none who does good, no, not one.
Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge, who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not upon God?
There they were in great fear, where no fear was, for God has scattered the bones of him who encamps against thee. Thou have put them to shame because God has rejected them.
O that the salvation of Israel came out of Zion! When God brings back the captivity of his people, then Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.

Save me, O God, by thy name, and judge me in thy might.
Hear my prayer, O God. Give ear to the words of my mouth.
For strangers are risen up against me, and violent men have sought after my soul. They have not set God before them. Selah.
Behold, God is my helper. The Lord is of those who uphold my soul.
He will requite the evil to my enemies. Destroy thou them in thy truth.
With a freewill offering I will sacrifice to thee. I will give thanks to thy name, O Jehovah, for it is good.
For he has delivered me out of all trouble, and my eye has seen it upon my enemies.

Give ear to my prayer, O God, and hide not thyself from my supplication.
Attend to me, and answer me. I am restless in my complaint, and moan,
because of the voice of the enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked. For they cast iniquity upon me, and in anger they persecute me.
My heart is greatly pained within me, and the terrors of death have fallen upon me.
Fearfulness and trembling have come upon me, and horror has overwhelmed me.
And I said, O that I had wings like a dove! Then I would fly away, and be at rest.
Lo, then I would wander far off. I would lodge in the wilderness. Selah.
I would hasten myself to a shelter from the stormy wind and tempest.
Destroy, O Lord, divide their tongue, for I have seen violence and strife in the city.
Day and night they go about it, upon the walls of it. Iniquity and mischief also are in the midst of it.
Wickedness is in the midst of it. Oppression and deceit depart not from its streets.
For it was not an enemy who reproached me. Then I could have borne it. Neither was it he who hated me that magnified himself against me. Then I would have hid myself from him.
But it was thou, a man my equal, my companion, and my familiar friend.
We took sweet counsel together. We walked in the house of God with the throng.
Let death come suddenly upon them. Let them go down alive into Sheol. For wickedness is in their dwelling, in the midst of them.
As for me, I will call upon God, and Jehovah will save me.
Evening, and morning, and at noonday, I will complain and moan. And he will hear my voice.
He has redeemed my soul in peace from the battle that was against me, for there were many by me.
God will hear, and respond to them, (even he who abides of old), Selah, men who have no changes, and who fear not God.
He has put forth his hands against such as were at peace with him. He has profaned his covenant.
His mouth was smooth as butter, but his heart was war. His words were softer than oil, yet they were drawn swords.
(Cast thy burden upon Jehovah, and he will sustain thee. He will never allow the righteous man to be moved.)
But thou, O God, will bring them down into the pit of destruction. Bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their days, but I will trust in thee.

Be merciful to me, O God, for man would swallow me up. Fighting all the day long he oppresses me.
My enemies would swallow me up all the day long, for they are many who fight proudly against me.
What time I am afraid, I will put my trust in thee.
In God I will praise his word. In God I have put my trust. I will not be afraid. What can flesh do to me?
All the day long they wrest my words. All their thoughts are against me for evil.
They gather themselves together. They hide themselves. They mark my steps, even as they have waited for my soul.
Shall they escape by iniquity? In anger cast down the peoples, O God.
Thou number my wanderings. Put thou my tears into thy bottle. Are they not in thy book?
Then shall my enemies turn back in the day that I call. This I know, that God is for me.
In God I will praise his word. In Jehovah I will praise his word.
In God I have put my trust. I will not be afraid. What can man do to me?
Thy vows are upon me, O God. I will render thank offerings to thee.
For thou have delivered my soul from death, and my feet from falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living.

Be merciful to me, O God, be merciful to me, for my soul takes refuge in thee. Yea, in the shadow of thy wings I will take refuge until calamities be passed by.
I will cry to God Most High, to God who performs for me.
He will send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him who would swallow me up. Selah. God will send forth his loving kindness and his truth.
My soul is among lions. I lie among those who are set on fire, even the sons of men, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, thy glory above all the earth.
They have prepared a net for my steps. My soul is bowed down. They have dug a pit before me. They are fallen into the midst of it themselves. Selah.
My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed. I will sing, yea, I will sing praises.
Awake up, my glory. Awake, psaltery and harp. I myself will awake right early.
I will give thanks to thee, O Lord, among the peoples. I will sing praises to thee among the nations.
For thy loving kindness is great to the heavens, and thy truth to the skies.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, thy glory above all the earth.

Do ye indeed speak righteousness in silence? Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of men?
No! In heart ye work wickedness. Ye weigh out the violence of your hands in the earth.
The wicked are estranged from the womb. They go astray as soon as they are born, speaking lies.
Their poison is like the poison of a serpent, like the deaf adder that stops her ear,
which hearkens not to the voice of charmers, charming ever so wisely.
Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth. Break out the great teeth of the young lions, O Jehovah.
Let them melt away as water that runs with haste. When he aims his arrows, let them be as though they were cut off,
as a snail which melts and passes away, as the untimely birth of a woman, that has not seen the sun.
Before your pots can feel the thorns, he will take them away with a whirlwind, the green and the burning alike.
A righteous man shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance. He shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked,
so that men shall say, Truly there is a reward for the righteous man. Truly there is a God who judges in the earth.

Deliver me from my enemies, O my God. Set me on high from those who rise up against me.
Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from the bloodthirsty men.
For, lo, they lie in wait for my soul. The mighty gather themselves together against me, not for my transgression, nor for my sin, O Jehovah.
They run and prepare themselves without my fault. Awake thou to help me, and behold.
Even thou, O Jehovah God of hosts, the God of Israel, arise to visit all the nations. Be not merciful to any wicked transgressors. Selah.
They return at evening. They howl like a dog, and go round about the city.
Behold, they belch out with their mouth. Swords are in their lips, for they say, Who hears?
But thou, O Jehovah, will laugh at them. Thou will have all the nations in derision.
O my strength, I will give heed to thee, for God is my high tower.
My God with his loving kindness will meet me. God will let me look upon my enemies.
Kill them not, lest my people forget. Scatter them by thy power, and bring them down, O Lord our shield,
for the sin of their mouth, and the words of their lips. Let them even be taken in their pride, and for cursing and lying which they speak.
Consume them in wrath, consume them, so that they shall be no more. And let them know that God rules in Jacob, to the ends of the earth. Selah.
And at evening let them return, let them howl like a dog, and go round about the city.
They shall wander up and down for food, and tarry all night if they be not satisfied.
But I will sing of thy strength. Yea, I will sing aloud of thy loving kindness in the morning. For thou have been my high tower, and a refuge in the day of my distress.
To thee, O my strength, I will sing praises. For God is my high tower, the God of my mercy.

O God thou have cast us off. Thou have broken us down. Thou have been angry. O restore us again.
Thou have made the land to tremble. Thou have torn it. Heal the breaking of it, for it shakes.
Thou have shown thy people hard things. Thou have made us to drink the wine of staggering.
Thou have given a banner to those who fear thee, that it may be displayed because of the truth. Selah.
That thy beloved ones may be delivered, save with thy right hand, and answer us.
God has spoken in his holiness. I will exult. I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine. Ephraim also is the defense of my head. Judah is my scepter.
Moab is my wash pot. Upon Edom I will cast my shoe. Philistia, shout thou because of me.
Who will bring me into the strong city? Who has led me to Edom?
Have not thou, O God, cast us off? And thou go not forth, O God, with our armies.
Give us help against the adversary, for vain is the help of man.
Through God we shall do valiantly, for he it is who will tread down our adversaries.

Hear my cry, O God. Attend to my prayer.
From the end of the earth I will call to thee when my heart is overwhelmed. Lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
For thou have been a refuge for me, a strong tower from the enemy.
I will dwell in thy tabernacle forever. I will take refuge in the covert of thy wings. Selah.
For thou, O God, have heard my vows. Thou have given me the heritage of those who fear thy name.
Thou will prolong the king's life. His years shall be as many generations.
He shall abide before God forever. O prepare loving kindness and truth that they may preserve him.
So I will sing praise to thy name forever, that I may daily perform my vows.

My soul waits in silence for God only. From him is my salvation.
He only is my rock and my salvation, my high tower. I shall not be greatly moved.
How long will ye set upon a man, that ye may kill, all of you, like a leaning wall, like a tottering fence?
They only consult to thrust him down from his dignity. They delight in lies. They bless with their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.
My soul, wait thou in silence for God only, for my expectation is from him.
He only is my rock and my salvation, my high tower. I shall not be moved.
With God is my salvation and my glory. The rock of my strength, and my refuge, is in God.
Trust in him at all times, ye people. Pour out your heart before him. God is a refuge for us. Selah.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie. In the balances they will go up. They are together lighter than vanity.
Trust not in oppression, and become not vain in robbery. If riches increase, set not your heart on it.
God has spoken once, twice I have heard this, that power belongs to God.
Also to thee, O Lord, belongs loving kindness, for thou render to every man according to his work.

O God, thou are my God. I will earnestly seek thee. My soul thirsts for thee, my flesh longs for thee, in a dry and weary land, where is no water.
So I have looked upon thee in the sanctuary to see thy power and thy glory.
Because thy loving kindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee.
So I will bless thee while I live. I will lift up my hands in thy name.
My soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness. And my mouth shall praise thee with joyful lips
when I remember thee upon my bed, and meditate on thee in the night-watches.
For thou have been my help, and in the shadow of thy wings I will rejoice.
My soul follows close after thee. Thy right hand upholds me.
But those who seek my soul, to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of the earth.
They shall be given over to the power of the sword. They shall be a portion for foxes.
But the king shall rejoice in God. Everyone who swears by him shall glory, for the mouth of those who speak lies shall be stopped.

Hear my voice, O God, in my complaint. Preserve my life from fear of the enemy.
Hide me from the secret counsel of evildoers, from the tumult of the workers of iniquity,
who have whet their tongue like a sword, and have aimed their arrows, even bitter words,
that they may shoot in secret places at a blameless man. Suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not.
They encourage themselves in an evil purpose. They converse of laying snares secretly. They say, Who will see them?
They search out iniquities, saying, We have accomplished a diligent search. And the inward part of man and the heart are deep.
But God will shoot at them. With an arrow they shall suddenly be wounded.
So they shall be made to stumble, their own tongue being against them. All who see them shall wag the head.
And all men shall fear. And they shall declare the work of God, and shall wisely consider of his doing.
A righteous man shall be glad in Jehovah, and shall take refuge in him. And all the upright in heart shall glory.

Praise waits for thee, O God, in Zion. And to thee the vow shall be performed.
O thou who hear prayer, to thee all flesh shall come.
Iniquities prevail against me. As for our transgressions, thou will forgive them.
Blessed is the man whom thou choose and cause to approach, that he may dwell in thy courts. We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, thy holy temple.
By awesome things thou will answer us in righteousness, O God of our salvation, thou who are the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of those who are afar off upon the sea,
who by his strength sets firm the mountains, being girded about with might,
who stills the roaring of the seas, the roaring of their waves, and the tumult of the peoples.
They also who dwell in the outermost parts are afraid at thy signs. Thou make the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.
Thou visit the earth, and water it; thou greatly enrich it. The river of God is full of water. Thou provide them grain when thou have so prepared the earth.
Thou water its furrows abundantly. Thou settle the ridges of it. Thou make it soft with showers. Thou bless the springing of it.
Thou crown the year with thy goodness, and thy paths drop fatness.
They drop upon the pastures of the wilderness, and the hills are girded with joy.
The pastures are clothed with flocks. The valleys also are covered over with grain. They shout for joy; they also sing.

Make a joyful noise to God, all the earth.
Sing forth the glory of his name. Make his praise glorious.
Say to God, How awesome are thy works! Through the greatness of thy power thine enemies shall submit themselves to thee.
All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing to thee. They shall sing to thy name. Selah.
Come, and see the works of God, awesome in actions toward the sons of men.
He turned the sea into dry land. They went through the river on foot. There we rejoiced in him.
He rules by his might forever. His eyes observe the nations. Let not the rebellious exalt themselves. Selah.
O bless our God, ye peoples, and make the voice of his praise to be heard,
who holds our soul in life, and does not allow our feet to be moved.
For thou, O God, have proved us. Thou have tried us as silver is tried.
Thou brought us into the net. Thou laid a great burden upon our loins.
Thou caused men to ride over our heads. We went through fire and through water. But thou brought us out into a wealthy place.
I will come into thy house with burnt offerings. I will pay thee my vows,
which my lips uttered, and my mouth spoke, when I was in distress.
I will offer to thee burnt offerings of fatlings, with the incense of rams. I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.
Come, and hear, all ye who fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my soul.
I cried to him with my mouth, and he was extolled with my tongue.
If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear.
But truly God has heard. He has attended to the voice of my prayer.
Blessed be God, who has not turned away my prayer, nor his loving kindness from me.

God be merciful to us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine upon us (Selah),
that thy way may be known upon earth, thy salvation among all nations.
Let the peoples praise thee, O God. Let all the peoples praise thee.
O let the nations be glad and sing for joy. For thou will judge the peoples with equity, and govern the nations upon earth. Selah.
Let the peoples praise thee, O God. Let all the peoples praise thee.
The earth has yielded its increase. God, even our own God, will bless us.
God will bless us, and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.

Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered. Let also those who hate him flee before him.
As smoke is driven away, so drive them away. As wax melts before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.
But let the righteous be glad. Let them exult before God. Yea, let them rejoice with gladness.
Sing to God, sing praises to his name. Cast up a highway for him who rides through the deserts. His name is Jehovah, and exult ye before him.
A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation.
God sets the lonely in families. He brings out the prisoners into prosperity, but the rebellious dwell in a parched land.
O God, when thou went forth before thy people, when thou marched through the wilderness (Selah)
the earth trembled, the heavens also dropped at the presence of God, Sinai at the presence of God, the God of Israel.
Thou, O God, sent a plentiful rain. Thou confirmed thine inheritance when it was weary.
Thy congregation dwelt in it. Thou, O God, prepared for the poor from thy goodness.
The Lord gave the word. Great was the company of those who published it.
Kings of armies fled quickly, and she who remained at home divided the spoil.
Though ye lie between two boundaries, it is as the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her pinions with yellow gold.
When the Almighty scattered kings in it, it was as it snows in Zalmon.
A mountain of God is the mountain of Bashan; a high mountain is the mountain of Bashan.
Why look ye askance, ye high mountains, at the mountain which God has desired for his abode? Yea, Jehovah will dwell in it forever.
The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands upon thousands. The Lord is among them, as in Sinai, in the sanctuary.
Thou have ascended on high. Thou have led captivity captive. Thou have received gifts among men, yea, among the rebellious also, that Jehovah God might dwell with them.
Blessed be the Lord, who bears our burden daily, even the God who is our salvation. Selah.
God is to us a God of deliverances, and escape from death belongs to Jehovah the Lord.
But God will smite through the head of his enemies, the hairy scalp of him who still goes in his guiltiness.
The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan. I will bring again from the depths of the sea,
that thou may dash thy foot in blood, that the tongue of thy dogs may have its portion from enemies.
They have seen thy goings, O God, even the goings of my God, my King, into the sanctuary.
The singers went before, the minstrels followed after, in the midst of the damsels playing with timbrels.
Bless ye God in the congregations, the lord of the fountain of Israel.
There is little Benjamin their ruler, the rulers of Judah and their council, the rulers of Zebulun, the rulers of Naphtali.
Thy God has commanded thy strength. Strengthen, O God, that which thou have wrought for us.
Because of thy temple at Jerusalem kings shall bring presents to thee.
Rebuke the wild beast of the reeds, the multitude of the bulls, with the calves of the peoples, trampling under foot the pieces of silver. He has scattered the peoples that delight in war.
Rulers shall come out of Egypt. Ethiopia shall hasten to stretch out her hands to God.
Sing to God, ye kingdoms of the earth. O sing praises to the Lord (Selah),
to him who rides upon the heaven of heavens, which are of old. Lo, he utters his voice, a mighty voice.
Ascribe ye strength to God. His excellency is over Israel, and his strength is in the skies.
O God, awesome out of thy holy places, the God of Israel, he gives strength and power to his people. Blessed be God.

Save me, O God, for the waters have come in to my soul.
I sink in deep mire where there is no standing. I have come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me.
I am weary with my crying. My throat is dried. My eyes fail while I wait for my God.
Those who hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of my head. Those who would cut me off, being my enemies wrongfully, are mighty. That which I took not away I have to restore.
O God, thou know my foolishness, and my sins are not hid from thee.
Let not those who wait for thee be put to shame through me, O lord Jehovah of hosts. Let not those who seek thee be brought to dishonor through me, O God of Israel.
Because for thy sake I have borne reproach, shame has covered my face.
I have become a stranger to my brothers, and an alien to my mother's sons.
For the zeal of thy house has eaten me up, and the reproaches of those who reproach thee have fallen upon me.
When I wept in my soul with fasting, that was to my reproach.
When I made sackcloth my clothing, I became a byword to them.
Those who sit in the gate talk of me, and I am the song of the drunkards.
But as for me, my prayer is to thee, O Jehovah. In an acceptable time, O God, in the abundance of thy loving kindness, answer me in the truth of thy salvation.
Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink. Let me be delivered from those who hate me, and out of the deep waters.
Let not the water flood overwhelm me, nor let the deep swallow me up. And let not the pit shut its mouth upon me.
Answer me, O Jehovah, for thy loving kindness is good. According to the multitude of thy tender mercies turn thou to me,
and hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in distress. Answer me speedily.
Draw near to my soul, and redeem it. Ransom me because of my enemies.
Thou know my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonor. My adversaries are all before thee.
Reproach has broken my heart, and I am full of heaviness. And I looked for some to take pity, but there was none, and for comforters, but I found none.
They also gave me gall for my food, and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
Let their table before them become a snare, and when they are in peace, a trap, and for a stumbling block, and for a retribution to them.
Let their eyes be darkened, so that they cannot see, and bow down their back continually.
Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let the fierceness of thine anger overtake them.
Let their habitation be desolate. Let none dwell in their tents.
For they persecute him whom thou have smitten, and they tell of the sorrow of those whom thou have wounded.
Add iniquity to their iniquity, and let them not come into thy righteousness.
Let them be blotted out of the book of life, and not be written with the righteous.
But I am poor and sorrowful. Let thy salvation, O God, set me up on high.
I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving,
and it will please Jehovah better than an ox, or a bullock that has horns and hoofs.
The meek have seen it, and are glad. Ye who seek after God, let your heart live.
For Jehovah hears the needy, and does not despise his prisoners.
Let heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and everything that moves therein.
For God will save Zion, and build the cities of Judah. And they shall abide there, and have it in possession.
The seed also of his servants shall inherit it, and those who love his name shall dwell therein.

Hasten, O God, to deliver me. Make haste to help me, O Jehovah.
Let them be put to shame and confounded who seek after my soul. Let them be turned backward and brought to dishonor who delight in my hurt.
Let them be turned back because of their shame who say, Aha, aha.
Let all those who seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee. And let such as love thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified.
But I am poor and needy. Make haste to me, O God. Thou are my help and my deliverer, O Jehovah. Delay thou not.

In thee, O Jehovah, do I take refuge. Let me never be put to shame.
Deliver me in thy righteousness, and rescue me. Bow down thine ear to me, and save me.
Be thou to me a rock of habitation to which I may continually resort. Thou have given commandment to save me, for thou are my rock and my fortress.
Rescue me, O my God, out of the hand of a wicked man, out of the hand of an unrighteous and cruel man.
For thou are my hope, O lord Jehovah, my trust from my youth.
By thee I have been held up from the womb. Thou are he who took me out of my mother's bowels. My praise shall be continually of thee.
I am as a wonder to many, but thou are my strong refuge.
My mouth shall be filled with thy praise, and with thy honor all the day.
Cast me not off in the time of old age. Forsake me not when my strength fails.
For my enemies speak concerning me, and those who watch for my soul take counsel together,
saying, God has forsaken him. Pursue and take him, for there is none to deliver.
O God, be not far from me. O my God, make haste to help me.
Let them be put to shame and consumed who are adversaries to my soul. Let them be covered with reproach and dishonor who seek my hurt.
But I will hope continually, and will praise thee yet more and more.
My mouth shall tell of thy righteousness, of thy salvation all the day, for I know not the numbers.
I will come with the mighty acts of the lord Jehovah. I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine only.
O God, thou have taught me from my youth, and I have declared thy wondrous works until now.
Yea, even when I am old and gray headed, O God, forsake me not, until I have declared thy strength to a generation, thy might to everyone who is to come.
Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, thou who have done great things. O God, who is like thee?
Thou, who have shown us many and great troubles, will revive us again, and will bring us up again from the depths of the earth.
Increase thou my greatness, and turn again and comfort me.
I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth, O my God. To thee I will sing praises with the harp, O thou Holy One of Israel.
My lips shall shout for joy when I sing praises to thee, and my soul, which thou have redeemed.
My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long. For they are put to shame, for they are confounded, who seek my hurt.

Give the king thy judgments, O God, and thy righteousness to the king's son.
He will judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with justice.
The mountains shall bring peace to the people, and the hills, in righteousness.
He will judge the poor of the people. He will save the sons of the needy, and will break in pieces the oppressor.
They shall fear thee while the sun endures, and as long as the moon, throughout all generations.
He will come down like rain upon the mown grass, as showers that water the earth.
In his days righteousness shall flourish, and abundance of peace, till the moon is no more.
He shall also have dominion from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth.
Those who dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust.
The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall render tribute. The kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer gifts.
Yea, all kings shall fall down before him. All nations shall serve him.
For he will deliver a needy man when he cries, and a poor man, who has no helper.
He will have pity on a poor and needy man, and he will save the souls of the needy.
He will redeem their soul from oppression and violence. And their blood will be precious in his sight,
and they shall live. And to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba. And men shall pray for him continually. They shall bless him all the day long.
There shall be abundance of grain in the earth upon the top of the mountains. The fruit of it shall shake like Lebanon. And they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.
His name shall endure forever. His name shall be continued as long as the sun. And men shall be blessed in him. All nations shall call him blessed.
Blessed be Jehovah God, the God of Israel, who alone does wondrous things.
And blessed be his glorious name forever. And let the whole earth be filled with his glory. Truly, and Truly.
The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.

Surely God is good to Israel, to such as are pure in heart.
But as for me, my feet were almost gone. My steps had well nigh slipped.
For I was envious of the arrogant when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
For there are no pangs in their death, but their strength is firm.
They are not in trouble as other men, nor are they plagued like other men.
Therefore pride is as a chain around their neck. Violence covers them as a garment.
Their eyes stand out with fatness. They have more than heart could wish.
They scoff, and in wickedness utter oppression. They speak loftily.
They have set their mouth in the heavens, and their tongue walks through the earth.
Therefore his people return here, and waters of a full cup are drained by them.
And they say, How does God know? And is there knowledge in the Most High?
Behold, these are the wicked, and those who always prosper. They have possessed wealth.
Surely in vain I have cleansed my heart, and washed my hands in innocence,
for all the day long I have been plagued, and chastened every morning.
If I had said, I will speak thus, behold, I would have dealt treacherously with the generation of thy sons.
When I thought how I might understand this, it was too painful for me,
until I went into the sanctuary of God, and considered their latter end.
Surely thou set them in slippery places. Thou cast them down to destruction.
How they have become a desolation in a moment! They are utterly consumed with terrors.
As a dream from awakening, O Lord, when thou waken, thou will despise their form.
For my soul was grieved, and I was pricked in my heart.
So I was brutish, and ignorant. I was a beast before thee.
Nevertheless I am continually with thee. Thou have held my right hand.
Thou will guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.
Whom have I in heaven? And there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.
My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of my heart and my portion forever.
For, lo, those who are far from thee shall perish. Thou have destroyed all those who go a whoring from thee.
But it is good for me to draw near to God. I have made the lord Jehovah my refuge, that I may tell of all thy works.

O God, why have thou cast off forever? Why does thine anger smoke against the sheep of thy pasture?
Remember thy congregation, which thou have gotten of old, which thou have redeemed to be the tribe of thine inheritance, and mount Zion, at which thou have dwelt.
Lift up thy feet to the perpetual ruins, all the evil that the enemy has done in the sanctuary.
Thine adversaries have roared in the midst of thine assembly. They have set up their ensigns for signs.
They seemed as men who lifted up axes upon a thicket of trees.
And now they break down all the carved work of it with hatchet and hammers.
They have set thy sanctuary on fire. They have profaned the dwelling-place of thy name to the ground.
They said in their heart, Let us make havoc of them altogether. They have burned up all the meeting-places of God in the land.
We do not see our signs. There is no more any prophet, nor is there among us he who knows how long.
How long, O God, shall the adversary reproach? Shall the enemy blaspheme thy name forever?
Why do thou draw back thy hand, even thy right hand? Remove it from the midst of thy bosom.
Yet God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.
Thou divided the sea by thy strength. Thou break the heads of the sea-monsters in the waters.
Thou break the heads of leviathan in pieces. Thou gave him to be food to the people inhabiting the wilderness.
Thou split fountain and flood. Thou dried up mighty rivers.
The day is thine; the night is also thine. Thou have prepared the light and the sun.
Thou have set all the borders of the earth. Thou have made summer and winter.
Remember this, that the enemy has reproached, O Jehovah, and that a foolish people has blasphemed thy name.
O deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove to the wild beast. Forget not the life of thy poor forever.
Have respect to the covenant, for the dark places of the earth are full of the habitations of violence.
O let not he who is oppressed return ashamed. Let a poor and needy man praise thy name.
Arise, O God, plead thine own cause. Remember how the foolish man reproaches thee all the day.
Forget not the voice of thine adversaries. The tumult of those who rise up against thee ascends continually.

We give thanks to thee, O God. We give thanks, for thy name is near. Men tell of thy wondrous works.
When I shall find the set time, I will judge uprightly;
when the earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved. I have set up the pillars of it. Selah.
I said to the arrogant, Deal not arrogantly, and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn.
Lift not up your horn on high. Speak not with a stiff neck.
For neither from the east, nor from the west, nor yet from the south, comes lifting up.
But God is the judge. He put one down, and lifts another up.
For in the hand of Jehovah there is a cup, and the wine foams. It is full of mixture, and he pours out of the same, surely to the dregs of it. All the wicked of the earth shall drain them, and drink them.
But I will declare forever. I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
All the horns of the wicked I will also cut off, but the horns of a righteous man shall be lifted up.

In Judah God is known. His name is great in Israel.
In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling-place in Zion.
There he broke the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah.
Thou are more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey.
The stouthearted are made a spoil. They have slept their sleep, and none of the men of might have found their hands.
At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob, both chariot and horse are cast into a deep sleep.
Thou, even thou, are to be feared. And who may stand in thy sight when once thou are angry?
Thou caused sentence to be heard from heaven. The earth feared and was still
when God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah.
Surely the inward thought of man shall praise thee, even the residue of inward thought will observe a festival to thee.
Vow, and pay to Jehovah your God. Let all who are round about him bring presents to him who ought to be feared.
He will cut off the spirit of rulers. He is fearful to the kings of the earth.

I will cry to God with my voice, even to God with my voice, and he will give ear to me.
In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord. My hand was stretched out in the night, and slacked not. My soul refused to be comforted.
I remember God, and am disquieted. I complain, and my spirit is overwhelmed. Selah.
Thou have held my eyelids watching. I am so troubled that I cannot speak.
I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times.
I call to remembrance my song in the night. I commune with my own heart, and my spirit makes diligent search.
Will the Lord cast off forever? And will he be favorable no more?
Has his loving kindness entirely gone forever? Does his promise fail for evermore?
Has God forgotten to be gracious? Has he in anger shut up his tender mercies? Selah.
And I said, This is my infirmity, the change of the right hand of the Most High.
I will make mention of the deeds of Jehovah, for I will remember thy wonders of old.
I will meditate also upon all thy work, and muse on thy doings.
Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary. Who is a great god like God?
Thou are the God who does wonders. Thou have made known thy strength among the peoples.
With thine arm thou have redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah.
The waters saw thee, O God, the waters saw thee. They were afraid. The depths also trembled.
The clouds poured out water. The skies sent out a sound. Thine arrows also went abroad.
The voice of thy thunder was in the whirlwind. The lightnings lightened the world. The earth trembled and shook.
Thy way was in the sea, and thy paths in the great waters. And thy footsteps were not known.
Thou led thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

Give ear, O my people, to my law. Incline your ears to the words of my mouth.
I will open my mouth in parables. I will utter dark sayings of old,
which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.
We will not hide them from their sons, telling to the generation to come the praises of Jehovah, and his strength, and his wondrous works that he has done.
For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel, which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their sons,
that the generation to come might know, even the sons who should be born, who should arise and tell to their sons,
that they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments,
a stubborn and rebellious generation, a generation that set not their heart aright, and whose spirit was not steadfast with God.
The sons of Ephraim, being armed and carrying bows, turned back in the day of battle.
They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law.
And they forgot his doings, and his wondrous works that he had shown them.
He did marvelous things in the sight of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.
He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through. And he made the waters to stand as a heap.
In the daytime also he led them with a cloud, and all the night with a light of fire.
He split rocks in the wilderness, and gave them drink abundantly as out of the depths.
He brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers.
Yet they went on to still sin against him, to rebel against the Most High in the desert.
And they challenged God in their heart by asking food according to their desire.
Yea, they spoke against God. They said, Can God prepare a table in the wilderness?
Behold, he smote the rock, so that waters gushed out, and streams overflowed. Can he give bread also? Will he provide flesh for his people?
Therefore Jehovah heard, and was angry. And a fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger also went up against Israel,
because they did not believe in God, and did not trust in his salvation.
Yet he commanded the skies above, and opened the doors of heaven,
and he rained down manna upon them to eat, and gave them food from heaven.
Man ate the bread of the mighty. He sent them food to the full.
He caused the east wind to blow in the heavens, and by his power he guided the south wind.
He also rained flesh upon them as the dust, and winged birds as the sand of the seas.
And he let it fall in the midst of their camp round about their habitations.
So they ate, and were well filled, and he gave them their own desire.
They were not estranged from that which they desired. Their food was yet in their mouths
when the anger of God went up against them, and killed of the fattest of them, and smote down the young men of Israel.
For all this they still sinned, and did not believe in his wondrous works.
Therefore he consumed their days in vanity, and their years in terror.
When he killed them, then they inquired after him, and they returned and sought God earnestly.
And they remembered that God was their rock, and the Most High God their redeemer.
But they flattered him with their mouth, and lied to him with their tongue.
For their heart was not right with him, nor were they faithful in his covenant.
But he, being merciful, forgave iniquity, and destroyed not. Yea, many a time he turned his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath.
And he remembered that they were but flesh, a wind that passes away, and comes not again.
How often they rebelled against him in the wilderness, and grieved him in the desert!
And they turned again and challenged God, and provoked the Holy One of Israel.
They did not remember his hand, nor the day when he redeemed them from the adversary,
how he set his signs in Egypt, and his wonders in the field of Zoan,
and turned their rivers into blood, and their streams, so that they could not drink.
He sent among them swarms of flies, which devoured them, and frogs, which destroyed them.
He also gave their increase to the caterpillar, and their labor to the locust.
He destroyed their vines with hail, and their sycamore trees with frost.
He also gave over their cattle to the hail, and their flocks to hot thunderbolts.
He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble, a band of agents of evil.
He made a path for his anger. He spared not their soul from death, but gave their life over to the pestilence,
and smote all the firstborn in Egypt, the chief of their strength in the tents of Ham.
But he led forth his own people like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.
And he led them safely, so that they feared not, but the sea overwhelmed their enemies.
And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, to this mountain, which his right hand had gotten.
He also drove out the nations before them, and allotted them for an inheritance by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.
Yet they challenged and rebelled against the Most High God, and kept not his testimonies,
but turned back, and dealt treacherously like their fathers. They were turned aside like a deceitful bow.
For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy with their graven images.
When God heard, he was angry, and greatly abhorred Israel,
so that he forsook the tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among men,
and delivered their strength into captivity, and their glory into the adversary's hand.
He also gave his people over to the sword, and was angry with his inheritance.
Fire devoured their young men, and their virgins had no marriage-song.
Their priests fell by the sword, and their widows made no lamentation.
Then the Lord awoke as out of sleep, like a mighty man who shouts because of wine.
And he smote his adversaries backward. He put them to a perpetual reproach.
Moreover he refused the tent of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim,
but chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved.
And he built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he has established forever.
He also chose David his servant, and took him from the sheepfolds.
He brought him from following the ewes that have their young, to be the shepherd of Jacob his people, and Israel his inheritance.
So he was their shepherd according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skillfulness of his hands.

O God, the nations have come into thine inheritance. They have defiled thy holy temple. They have laid Jerusalem in heaps.
They have given the dead bodies of thy servants to be food to the birds of the heavens, the flesh of thy sanctified to the beasts of the earth.
They have shed their blood like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none to bury them.
We have become a reproach to our neighbors, a scoffing and derision to those who are round about us.
How long, O Jehovah? Will thou be angry forever? Shall thy jealousy burn like fire?
Pour out thy wrath upon the nations that do not know thee, and upon the kingdoms that do not call upon thy name.
For they have devoured Jacob, and laid waste his habitation.
Do not remember against us the iniquities of our forefathers. Let thy tender mercies speedily meet us, for we are brought very low.
Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name. And deliver us, and forgive our sins, for thy name's sake.
Why should the nations say, Where is their God? Let the avenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed be known among the nations in our sight.
Let the sighing of the prisoner come before thee. According to the greatness of thy power preserve thou those who are appointed to death,
and render to our neighbors sevenfold into their bosom their reproach with which they have reproached thee, O Lord,
so we thy people and sheep of thy pasture will give thee thanks forever. We will show forth thy praise to all generations.

Give ear, O Shepherd of Israel, thou who lead Joseph like a flock. Thou who sit above the cherubim, shine forth.
Stir up thy might before Ephraim and Benjamin and Manasseh, and come to save us.
Turn us again, O God, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
O Jehovah God of hosts, how long will thou be angry against the prayer of thy people?
Thou have fed them with the bread of tears, and given them tears to drink in large measure.
Thou make us hatred to our neighbors, and our enemies laugh among themselves.
Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.
Thou brought a vine out of Egypt. Thou drove out the nations, and planted it.
Thou prepared place before it, and it took deep root, and filled the land.
The mountains were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs of it were like cedars of God.
It sent out its branches to the sea, and its shoots to the River.
Why have thou broken down its walls, so that all those who pass by the way pluck it?
The boar out of the wood ravages it, and the wild beasts of the field feed on it.
Turn again, we beseech thee, O God of hosts. Look down from heaven, and, behold, and visit this vine,
and the stock which thy right hand planted, and the branch that thou made strong for thyself.
It is burned with fire, it is cut down. They perish at the rebuke of thy countenance.
Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, upon the son of man whom thou made strong for thyself,
so shall we not go back from thee. Revive thou us, and we will call upon thy name.
Turn us again, O Jehovah God of hosts, cause thy face to shine, and we shall be saved.

Sing aloud to God our strength. Make a joyful noise to the God of Jacob.
Raise a song, and bring here the timbrel, the pleasant harp with the psaltery.
Blow the trumpet at the new moon, at the full moon, on our feast-day.
For it is a statute for Israel, an ordinance of the God of Jacob.
He appointed it in Joseph for a testimony when he went out over the land of Egypt, where I heard a language that I knew not.
I removed his shoulder from the burden. His hands were freed from the basket.
Thou called in trouble, and I delivered thee. I answered thee in the secret place of thunder. I proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.
Hear, O my people, and I will testify to thee, O Israel, if thou would hearken to me!
There shall no strange god be in thee, nor shall thou worship any foreign god.
I am Jehovah thy God who brought thee up out of the land of Egypt. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.
But my people hearkened not to my voice, and Israel would none of me.
So I let them go after the stubbornness of their heart, that they might walk in their own counsels.
O that my people would hearken to me, that Israel would walk in my ways!
I would soon subdue their enemies, and turn my hand against their adversaries.
(The haters of Jehovah feign obedience to him, but their time is forever.)
He would feed them also with the finest of the wheat. And I would satisfy thee with honey out of the rock.

God stands in the congregation of God. He judges among the gods.
How long will ye judge unjustly, and respect the persons of the wicked? Selah.
Judge the poor man and the orphan. Do justice to the afflicted and destitute man.
Rescue the poor and needy man. Deliver from the hand of the wicked man.
They know not, nor do they understand. They walk to and fro in darkness. All the foundations of the earth are shaken.
I said, Ye are gods, and all of you sons of the Most High.
Nevertheless ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the rulers.
Arise, O God, judge the earth, for thou shall inherit all the nations.

O God, keep thou not silence. Hold not thy peace, and be not still, O God.
For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult, and those who hate thee have lifted up the head.
They take crafty counsel against thy people, and consult together against thy hidden ones.
They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation, that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.
the tents of Edom, and the Ishmaelites, Moab, and the Hagarenes,
Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek, Philistia with the inhabitants of Tyre,
Assyria also is joined with them; they have helped the sons of Lot. Selah.
Do thou to them as to Midian, as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the river Kishon,
who perished at Endor, who became as dung for the earth.
Make their ranking men like Oreb and Zeeb, yea, all their rulers like Zebah and Zalmunna,
who said, Let us take to ourselves in possession the habitations of God.
O my God, make them like the whirling dust, as stubble before the wind,
as the fire that burns the forest, and as the flame that sets the mountains on fire.
So pursue them with thy tempest, and terrify them with thy storm.
Fill their faces with confusion, that they may seek thy name, O Jehovah.
Let them be put to shame and dismayed forever. Yea, let them be confounded and perish,
that they may know that thou alone, whose name is Jehovah, are the Most High over all the earth.

How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Jehovah of hosts!
My soul longs, yea, even faints for the courts of Jehovah. My heart and my flesh cry out to the living God.
Yea, the sparrow has found her a house, and the swallow a nest for herself where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O Jehovah of hosts, my King and my God.
Blessed are those who dwell in thy house. They will still be praising thee. Selah.
Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are the highways to Zion.
Passing through the valley of weeping they make it a place of springs. Yea, the early rain covers it with blessings.
They go from strength to strength; each one of them appears before God in Zion.
O Jehovah God of hosts, hear my prayer. Give ear, O God of Jacob. Selah.
Behold, O God our shield, and look upon the face of thine anointed.
For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
For Jehovah God is a sun and a shield. Jehovah will give grace and glory. He will withhold no good thing from those who walk uprightly.
O Jehovah of hosts, blessed is the man who trusts in thee.

Jehovah, thou have been favorable to thy land. Thou have brought back the captivity of Jacob.
Thou have forgiven the iniquity of thy people. Thou have covered all their sin. Selah.
Thou have taken away all thy wrath. Thou have turned from the fierceness of thine anger.
Turn us, O God of our salvation, and cause thine indignation toward us to cease.
Will thou be angry with us forever? Will thou draw out thine anger to all generations?
Will thou not revive us again, that thy people may rejoice in thee?
Show us thy loving kindness, O Jehovah, and grant us thy salvation.
I will hear what God, Jehovah, will speak, for he will speak peace to his people, and to his sanctified. But let them not turn again to folly.
Surely his salvation is near those who fear him, that glory may dwell in our land.
Mercy and truth are met together. Righteousness and peace have kissed each other.
Truth springs out of the earth, and righteousness has looked down from heaven.
Yea, Jehovah will give that which is good, and our land shall yield its increase.
Righteousness shall go before him, and shall make his footsteps a path.

Bow down thine ear, O Jehovah, and answer me, for I am poor and needy.
Preserve my soul, for I am devout. O thou my God, save thy servant who trusts in thee.
Be merciful to me, O Lord, for to thee do I cry all the day long.
Rejoice the soul of thy servant, for to thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul.
For thou, Lord, are good, and ready to forgive, and abundant in loving kindness to all those who call upon thee.
Give ear, O Jehovah, to my prayer, and hearken to the voice of my supplications.
In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee, for thou will answer me.
There is none like thee among the gods, O Lord, nor like thy works.
All nations whom thou have made shall come and worship before thee, O Lord, and they shall glorify thy name.
For thou are great, and do wondrous things. Thou alone are God.
Teach me thy way, O Jehovah, I will walk in thy truth. Unite my heart to fear thy name.
I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with my whole heart, and I will glorify thy name for evermore.
For great is thy loving kindness toward me, and thou have delivered my soul from the lowest Sheol.
O God, the proud have risen up against me, and a company of violent men have sought after my soul, and have not set thee before them.
But thou, O Lord, are a God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in loving kindness and truth.
O turn to me, and have mercy upon me. Give thy strength to thy servant, and save the son of thy handmaid.
Show me a sign for good, that those who hate me may see it, and be put to shame, because thou, Jehovah, have helped me, and comforted me.

His foundation is in the holy mountains.
Jehovah loves the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah.
This man was born there.
Yea, of Zion it shall be said, this and that man was born in her, and the Most High himself will establish her.
This man was born there. Selah.
Those who sing as well as those who dance shall say, All my fountains are in thee.

O Jehovah, the God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee.
Let my prayer enter into thy presence. Incline thine ear to my cry.
For my soul is full of troubles, and my life draws near to Sheol.
I am reckoned with those who go down into the pit. I am as a man who has no help,
cast off among the dead, like the slain who lie in the grave, whom thou remember no more, and they are cut off from thy hand.
Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in dark places, in the deeps.
Thy wrath lays hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy waves. Selah.
Thou have put my acquaintances far from me. Thou have made me an abomination to them. I am shut up, and I cannot come forth.
My eye wastes away because of affliction. I have called daily upon thee, O Jehovah, I have spread forth my hands to thee.
Will thou show wonders to the dead? Shall those who are deceased arise and praise thee? Selah.
Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the grave, or thy faithfulness in destruction?
Shall thy wonders be known in the dark, and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?
But to thee, O Jehovah, I have cried, and in the morning my prayer shall come before thee.
Jehovah, why do thou cast off my soul? Why do thou hide thy face from me?
I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up. While I suffer thy terrors I am confounded.
Thy fierce wrath has gone over me. Thy terrors have cut me off.
They came round about me like water all the day long. They encompassed me around together.
Thou have put beloved and friend far from me, and my acquaintances into darkness.

I will sing of the loving kindness of Jehovah forever. With my mouth I will make known thy faithfulness to all generations.
For I have said, Mercy shall be built up forever. Thy faithfulness thou will establish in the very heavens.
Thy seed I will establish forever, and build up thy throne to all generations. Selah.
And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Jehovah, thy faithfulness also in the assembly of the sanctified.
For who in the clouds can be compared to Jehovah? Who among the sons of the mighty is like Jehovah,
a God very awesome in the council of the holy ones, and to be feared above all those who are round about him?
O Jehovah God of hosts, who is a mighty one like thee, O Jehovah? And thy faithfulness is round about thee.
Thou rule the pride of the sea. When the waves of it arise, thou still them.
Thou have broken Rahab in pieces, as a wounded man. Thou have scattered thine enemies with the arm of thy strength.
The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine, the world and the fullness of it; thou have founded them.
The north and the south, thou have created them. Tabor and Hermon rejoice in thy name.
Thou have a mighty arm. Strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.
Righteousness and justice are the foundation of thy throne. Loving kindness and truth go before thy face.
Blessed is the people who know the joyful sound. They walk, O Jehovah, in the light of thy countenance.
In thy name do they rejoice all the day, and in thy righteousness are they exalted.
For thou are the glory of their strength, and in thy favor our horn shall be exalted.
For our shield belongs to Jehovah, and our king to the Holy One of Israel.
Then thou spoke in a vision to thy sanctified, and said, I have laid help upon a mighty man. I have exalted a chosen man out of the people.
I have found David my servant. With my holy oil I have anointed him,
with whom my hand shall be established. My arm also shall strengthen him.
The enemy shall not exact from him, nor the son of wickedness afflict him.
And I will beat down his adversaries before him, and smite those who hate him,
but my faithfulness and my loving kindness shall be with him, and in my name shall his horn be exalted.
I will also set his hand on the sea, and his right hand on the rivers.
He shall cry to me, Thou are my Father, my God, and the rock of my salvation.
I also will make him firstborn, the highest of the kings of the earth.
I will keep my loving kindness for him for evermore. And my covenant shall stand fast with him.
I will also make his seed to endure forever, and his throne as the days of heaven.
If his sons forsake my law, and walk not in my ordinances,
if they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments,
then I will visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes,
but my loving kindness I will not utterly take from him, nor allow my faithfulness to fail.
I will not break my covenant, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.
I have sworn once by my holiness; I will not lie to David.
His seed shall endure forever, and his throne as the sun before me.
It shall be established forever as the moon, and as the faithful witness in the sky. Selah.
But thou have cast off and rejected. Thou have been angry with thine anointed.
Thou have abhorred the covenant of thy servant. Thou have profaned his crown to the ground.
Thou have broken down all his hedges. Thou have brought his strongholds to ruin.
All who pass by the way rob him. He has become a reproach to his neighbors.
Thou have exalted the right hand of his adversaries. Thou have made all his enemies to rejoice.
Yea, thou turn back the edge of his sword, and have not made him to stand in the battle.
Thou have made his brightness to cease, and cast his throne down to the ground.
The days of his youth thou have shortened. Thou have covered him with shame. Selah.
How long, O Jehovah? Will thou hide thyself forever? Shall thy wrath burn like fire?
O remember how short my time is, for what vanity thou have created all the sons of men!
What man is he who shall live and not see death, who shall deliver his soul from the power of Sheol? Selah.
Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses, which thou swore to David in thy faithfulness?
Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants, how I bear in my bosom all the mighty peoples,
with which thine enemies have reproached, O Jehovah, with which they have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.
Blessed be Jehovah for evermore. Truly, and Truly.

Lord, thou have been our dwelling-place in all generations.
Before the mountains were brought forth, or thou had ever formed the earth and the world, even from everlasting to everlasting, thou are God.
Thou turn man to destruction, and say, Return, ye sons of men.
For a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterday when it is past, and as a watch in the night.
Thou carry them away as with a flood. They are as a sleep. In the morning they are like grass which grows up.
In the morning it flourishes, and grows up. In the evening it is cut down, and withers.
For we are consumed in thine anger, and in thy wrath are we troubled.
Thou have set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance.
For all our days are passed away in thy wrath. We bring our years to an end as a sigh.
The days of our years are threescore years and ten, or even by reason of strength fourscore years, yet their pride is but labor and sorrow, for it is soon gone, and we fly away.
Who knows the power of thine anger, and thy wrath according to the fear that is due to thee?
So teach us to number our days, that we may get us a heart of wisdom.
Return, O Jehovah. How long? And relent concerning thy servants.
O satisfy us in the morning with thy loving kindness, that we may rejoice and be glad all our days.
Make us glad according to the days in which thou have afflicted us, and the years in which we have seen evil.
Let thy work appear to thy servants, and thy glory upon their sons.
And let the favor of the Lord our God be upon us. And establish thou the work of our hands upon us, yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.

He who dwells in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty.
I will say of Jehovah, He is my refuge and my fortress, my God, in whom I trust.
For he will deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the deadly pestilence.
He will cover thee with his pinions, and under his wings shall thou take refuge. His truth is a shield and a buckler.
Thou shall not be afraid for the terror by night, nor for the arrow that flies by day,
for the pestilence that walks in darkness, nor for the destruction that wastes at noonday.
A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand, but it shall not come near thee.
Thou shall only behold with thine eyes, and see the reward of the wicked.
For thou, O Jehovah, are my refuge! Thou have made the Most High thy habitation.
There shall no evil befall thee, nor shall any plague come near thy tent,
for he will give his agents charge over thee, to keep thee in all thy ways.
They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Thou shall tread upon the lion and adder. The young lion and the serpent thou shall trample under foot.
Because he has set his love upon me, therefore I will deliver him. I will set him on high because he has known my name.
He shall call upon me, and I will answer him. I will be with him in trouble. I will deliver him, and honor him.
I will satisfy him with long life, and show him my salvation.

It is a good thing to give thanks to Jehovah, and to sing praises to thy name, O Most High,
to show forth thy loving kindness in the morning, and thy faithfulness every night,
with an instrument of ten strings, and with the psaltery, with a solemn sound upon the harp.
For thou, Jehovah, have made me glad through thy work. I will triumph in the works of thy hands.
How great are thy works, O Jehovah! Thy thoughts are very deep.
A brutish man knows not, nor does a fool understand this.
When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers of iniquity flourish, it is that they shall be destroyed forever,
but thou, O Jehovah, are on high for evermore.
For, lo, thine enemies, O Jehovah, for, lo, thine enemies shall perish. All the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
But thou have exalted my horn like the wild ox's. I am anointed with fresh oil,
and my eye has seen my enemies. My ears have heard of the evildoers who rise up against me.
A righteous man shall flourish like the palm tree. He shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon.
Men who are planted in the house of Jehovah shall flourish in the courts of our God.
They shall still bring forth fruit in old age. They shall be full of sap and green
to show that Jehovah is upright. He is my rock, and there is no unrighteousness in him.

Jehovah reigns! He is clothed with majesty. Jehovah is clothed with strength; he has girded himself with it. The world also is established that it cannot be moved.
Thy throne is established of old. Thou are from everlasting.
The floods have lifted up, O Jehovah, the floods have lifted up their voice, the floods lift up their waves.
Above the voices of many waters, the mighty breakers of the sea, Jehovah on high is mighty.
Thy testimonies are very sure. Holiness befits thy house, O Jehovah, for evermore.

O Jehovah, thou God to whom vengeance belongs, thou God to whom vengeance belongs, shine forth.
Lift up thyself, thou judge of the earth. Render to the proud a recompense.
Jehovah, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph?
They prate, they speak arrogantly. All the workers of iniquity boast themselves.
They break in pieces thy people, O Jehovah, and afflict thy heritage.
They kill the widow and the sojourner, and murder the fatherless.
And they say, Jehovah will not see, nor will the God of Jacob consider.
Consider, ye brutish among the people, and ye fools, when will ye be wise?
He who planted the ear, shall he not hear? He who formed the eye, shall he not see?
He who chastises the nations, shall he not correct, even he who teaches man knowledge?
Jehovah knows the thoughts of man, that they are vanity.
Blessed is the man whom thou chasten, O Jehovah, and teach out of thy law,
that thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, until the pit is dug for a wicked man.
For Jehovah will not cast off his people, nor will he forsake his inheritance.
For judgment shall return to righteousness, and all the upright in heart shall follow it.
Who will rise up for me against the evildoers? Who will stand up for me against the workers of iniquity?
Unless Jehovah had been my help, my soul would have soon dwelt in silence.
When I said, My foot slips, thy loving kindness, O Jehovah, held me up.
In the multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul.
Shall the throne of wickedness have fellowship with thee, which frames mischief by statute?
They gather themselves together against the soul of a righteous man, and condemn innocent blood.
But Jehovah has been my high tower, and my God the rock of my refuge.
And he has brought upon them their own iniquity, and will cut them off in their own wickedness. Jehovah our God will cut them off.

O come, let us sing to Jehovah. Let us make a joyful noise to the rock of our salvation.
Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving. Let us make a joyful noise to him with psalms.
For Jehovah is a great God, and a great King above all gods.
In his hand are the deep places of the earth. The heights of the mountains are also his.
The sea is his, and he made it. And his hands formed the dry land.
O come, let us worship and bow down. Let us kneel before Jehovah our maker.
For he is our God, and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of his hand. Today, O that ye would hear his voice!
Harden not your heart, as in the provocation, as the day of trial in the wilderness,
where your fathers challenged me, proved me, and saw my work.
Forty years long I was grieved with that generation, and said, It is a people that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways.
Therefore I swore in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest.

O sing to Jehovah a new song. Sing to Jehovah, all the earth.
Sing to Jehovah, bless his name. Show forth his salvation from day to day.
Declare his glory among the nations, his marvelous works among all the peoples.
For great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised. He is to be feared above all gods.
For all the gods of the peoples are idols, but Jehovah made the heavens.
Honor and majesty are before him. Strength and beauty are in his sanctuary.
Ascribe to Jehovah, ye kindred of the peoples. Ascribe to Jehovah glory and strength.
Ascribe to Jehovah the glory due to his name. Bring an offering, and come into his courts.
O worship Jehovah in holy array. Tremble before him, all the earth.
Say among the nations, Jehovah reigns! The world also is established that it cannot be moved. He will judge the peoples with equity.
Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice. Let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof.
Let the field exult, and all that is in it. Then all the trees of the wood shall sing for joy
before Jehovah, for he comes. For he comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples with his truth.

Jehovah reigns! Let the earth rejoice. Let the multitude of isles be glad.
Clouds and darkness are round about him. Righteousness and justice are the foundation of his throne.
A fire goes before him, and burns up his adversaries round about.
His lightnings lightened the world. The earth saw, and trembled.
The mountains melted like wax at the presence of Jehovah, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
The heavens declare his righteousness, and all the peoples have seen his glory.
Let all those be put to shame who serve graven images, who boast themselves of idols. Bow yourselves to him, all ye gods.
Zion heard and was glad, and the daughters of Judah rejoiced, because of thy judgments, O Jehovah.
For thou, Jehovah, are most high above all the earth. Thou are exalted far above all gods.
O ye who love Jehovah, hate evil. He preserves the souls of his sanctified. He delivers them out of the hand of the wicked.
Light is sown for the righteous man, and gladness for the upright in heart.
Be glad in Jehovah, ye righteous, and give thanks to the memory of his holiness.

O sing to Jehovah a new song, for he has done marvelous things. His right hand, and his holy arm, has wrought salvation for him.
Jehovah has made known his salvation. He has openly shown his righteousness in the sight of the nations.
He has remembered his loving kindness and his faithfulness toward the house of Israel. All the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Make a joyful noise to Jehovah, all the earth. Break forth and sing for joy, yea, sing praises.
Sing praises to Jehovah with the harp. With the harp and the voice of melody,
with trumpets and sound of cornet, make a joyful noise before the King-Jehovah.
Let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof, the world, and those who dwell in it.
Let the floods clap their hands. Let the hills sing for joy together
before Jehovah, for he comes to judge the earth. He will judge the world with righteousness, and the peoples with equity.

Jehovah reigns! Let the peoples tremble. He sits above the cherubim, let the earth be moved.
Jehovah is great in Zion, and he is high above all the peoples.
Let them praise thy great and awesome name. Holy is he.
The king's strength also loves justice. Thou establish equity. Thou execute justice and righteousness in Jacob.
Exalt ye Jehovah our God, and worship at his footstool. Holy is he.
Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among those who call upon his name, they called upon Jehovah, and he answered them.
He spoke to them in the pillar of cloud. They kept his testimonies, and the statute that he gave them.
Thou answered them, O Jehovah our God. Thou were a God who forgave them, though thou took vengeance on their doings.
Exalt ye Jehovah our God, and worship at his holy hill. For Jehovah our God is holy.

Make a joyful noise to Jehovah, all ye lands.
Serve Jehovah with gladness. Come before his presence with singing.
Know ye that Jehovah, he is God. It is he who has made us, and we are his. We are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.
Enter into his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise. Give thanks to him, and bless his name.
For Jehovah is good. His loving kindness is forever, and his faithfulness to all generations.

I will sing of loving kindness and justice. To thee, O Jehovah, I will sing praises.
I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when will thou come to me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.
I will set no base thing before my eyes. I hate the work of those who turn aside. It shall not cleave to me.
A perverse heart shall depart from me. I will know no evil thing.
He who slanders his neighbor secretly, him I will destroy. He who has a high look and a proud heart I will not endure.
My eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me. He who walks in a perfect way, he shall minister to me.
He who works deceit shall not dwell within my house. He who speaks falsehood shall not be established before my eyes.
Morning by morning I will destroy all the wicked of the land, to cut off all the workers of iniquity from the city of Jehovah.

Hear my prayer, O Jehovah, and let my cry come to thee.
Hide not thy face from me in the day of my distress. Incline thine ear to me. In the day when I call answer me speedily.
For my days consume away like smoke, and my bones are burned as a firebrand.
My heart is smitten like grass, and withered, for I forget to eat my bread.
Because of the voice of my groaning my bones cling to my flesh.
I am like a pelican of the wilderness. I have become as an owl of the waste places.
I watch, and have become like a sparrow that is alone upon the house-top.
My enemies reproach me all the day. Those who are mad against me do curse by me.
For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my drink with weeping,
because of thine indignation and thy wrath. For thou have taken me up, and cast me away.
My days are like a shadow that declines, and I am withered like grass.
But thou, O Jehovah, will abide forever, and thy memorial to all generations.
Thou will arise, and have mercy upon Zion, for it is time to have pity upon her, yea, the set time has come.
For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and have pity upon her dust.
So the nations shall fear the name of Jehovah, and all the kings of the earth thy glory.
For Jehovah has built up Zion. He has appeared in his glory.
He has regarded the prayer of the destitute, and has not despised their prayer.
This shall be written for the generation to come. And a people which shall be created shall praise Jehovah.
For he has looked down from the height of his sanctuary. From heaven Jehovah beheld the earth,
to hear the sighing of the prisoner, to loose those who are appointed to death,
that men may declare the name of Jehovah in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem,
when the peoples are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve Jehovah.
He weakened my strength in the way. He shortened my days.
I said, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my days. Thy years are throughout all generations.
Of old thou laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of thy hands.
They shall perish, but thou shall endure. Yea, all of them shall grow old like a garment. As a vesture thou shall change them, and they shall be changed,
but thou are the same, and thy years shall have no end.
The sons of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be established before thee.

Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and all that is within me, bless his holy name.
Bless Jehovah, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits,
who forgives all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases,
who redeems thy life from destruction, who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender mercies,
who satisfies thy desire with good things, and thy youth is renewed like the eagle.
Jehovah executes righteous acts, and judgments for all who are oppressed.
He made known his ways to Moses, his doings to the sons of Israel.
Jehovah is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in loving kindness.
He will not always chide, nor will he keep it forever.
He has not dealt with us according to our sins, nor rewarded us according to our iniquities.
For as the heavens are high above the earth, so great is his loving kindness toward those who fear him.
As far as the east is from the west, so far has he removed our transgressions from us.
Like as a father pities his sons, So Jehovah pities those who fear him.
For he knows our frame. He remembers that we are dust.
As for man, his days are as grass, as a flower of the field, so he flourishes.
For the wind passes over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more.
But the loving kindness of Jehovah is from everlasting to everlasting upon those who fear him, and his righteousness to son's sons,
to such as keep his covenant, and to those who remember his precepts to do them.
Jehovah has established his throne in the heavens, and his kingdom rules over all.
Bless Jehovah, ye his agents, who are mighty in strength, who fulfill his word, hearkening to the voice of his word.
Bless Jehovah, all ye his hosts, ye ministers of his, who do his pleasure.
Bless Jehovah, all ye his works in all places of his dominion. Bless Jehovah, O my soul.

Bless Jehovah, O my soul. O Jehovah my God, thou are very great. Thou are clothed with honor and majesty,
who covers thyself with light as with a garment, who stretches out the heavens like a curtain,
who lays the beams of his chambers in the waters, who makes the clouds his chariot, who walks upon the wings of the wind,
who makes his agents spirits, his ministers a flame of fire,
who laid the foundations of the earth that it should not be moved forever.
Thou covered it with the deep as with a vesture. The waters stood above the mountains.
At thy rebuke they fled. At the voice of thy thunder they hastened away.
The mountains rose, the valleys sank down to the place which thou had founded for them.
Thou have set a bound that they may not pass over, that they turn not again to cover the earth.
He sends forth springs into the valleys. They run among the mountains.
They give drink to every beast of the field. The wild donkeys quench their thirst.
By them the birds of the heavens have their habitation. They sing among the branches.
He waters the mountains from his chambers. The earth is filled with the fruit of thy works.
He causes the grass to grow for the cattle, and herbage for the service of man, that he may bring forth food out of the earth,
and wine that makes glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread that strengthens man's heart.
The trees of Jehovah are full, the cedars of Lebanon, which he has planted,
where the birds make their nests. As for the stork, the fir trees are her house.
The high mountains are for the wild goats. The rocks are a refuge for the conies.
He appointed the moon for seasons. The sun knows his going down.
Thou make darkness, and it is night, during which all the beasts of the forest creep forth.
The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their food from God.
The sun arises; they get away, and lie down in their dens.
Man goes forth to his work and to his labor until the evening.
O Jehovah, how manifold are thy works! In wisdom have thou made them all. The earth is full of thy riches.
Yonder is the sea, great and wide, in which are innumerable creeping things, both small and great beasts.
There go the ships. There is leviathan, whom thou have formed to play in it.
These all wait for thee, that thou may give them their food in due season.
Thou give to them, they gather. Thou open thy hand, they are satisfied with good.
Thou hide thy face, they are troubled. Thou take away their breath, they die, and return to their dust.
Thou send forth thy Spirit, they are created, and thou renew the face of the ground.
Let the glory of Jehovah endure forever. Let Jehovah rejoice in his works,
who looks on the earth, and it trembles. He touches the mountains, and they smoke.
I will sing to Jehovah as long as I live. I will sing praise to my God while I have any being.
Let thy meditation be sweet to him. I will rejoice in Jehovah.
Let sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no more. Bless Jehovah, O my soul. Praise ye Jehovah.

O give thanks to Jehovah, call upon his name. Make known among the peoples his doings.
Sing to him, sing praises to him. Talk ye of all his marvelous works.
Glory ye in his holy name. Let the heart of those who seek Jehovah rejoice.
Seek ye Jehovah and his strength. Seek his face evermore.
Remember his marvelous works that he has done, his wonders, and the judgments of his mouth,
O ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye sons of Jacob, his chosen.
He is Jehovah our God. His judgments are in all the earth.
He has remembered his covenant forever, the word which he commanded to a thousand generations,
which he made with Abraham, and his oath to Isaac,
and confirmed the same to Jacob for a statute, to Israel for an everlasting covenant,
saying, To thee I will give the land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance,
when they were but a few men in number, yea, very few, and sojourners in it.
And they went about from nation to nation, From one kingdom to another people.
He allowed no man to do them wrong. Yea, he reproved kings for their sakes,
saying, Touch not my anointed men, and do my prophets no harm.
And he called for a famine upon the land. He broke the whole staff of bread.
He sent a man before them. Joseph was sold for a servant.
They hurt his feet with fetters. He was placed in iron.
Until the time that his word came to pass, the word of Jehovah tried him.
The king sent and released him, even the ruler of peoples, and let him go free.
He made him lord of his house, and ruler of all his substance,
to bind his rulers at his pleasure, and teach his elders wisdom.
Israel also came into Egypt, and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
And he increased his people greatly, and made them stronger than their adversaries.
He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal craftily with his servants.
He sent Moses his servant, and Aaron whom he had chosen.
They set among them his signs and wonders in the land of Ham.
He sent darkness, and made it dark. And they rebelled against his words.
He turned their waters into blood, and killed their fish.
Their land swarmed with frogs in the chambers of their kings.
He spoke, and there came swarms of flies, and lice in all their borders.
He gave them hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land.
He also smote their vines and their fig trees, and broke the trees of their borders.
He spoke, and the locust came, and the grasshopper, and that without number,
and ate up every herb in their land, and ate up the fruit of their ground.
He also smote all the firstborn in their land, the chief of all their strength.
And he brought them forth with silver and gold, and there was not a feeble soul among his tribes.
Egypt was glad when they departed, for the fear of them had fallen upon them.
He spread a cloud for a covering, and fire to give light in the night.
They asked, and he brought quails, and satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
He opened the rock, and waters gushed out. They ran in the dry places like a river.
For he remembered his holy word, and Abraham his servant.
And he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with singing.
And he gave them the lands of the nations, and they took the labor of the peoples in possession,
that they might keep his statutes, and observe his laws. Praise ye Jehovah.

Praise ye Jehovah. O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
Who can utter the mighty acts of Jehovah, or show forth all his praise?
Blessed are those who keep justice, and he who does righteousness at all times.
Remember me, O Jehovah, with the favor that thou bear to thy people. O visit me with thy salvation,
that I may see the prosperity of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation, that I may glory with thine inheritance.
We have sinned with our fathers. We have committed iniquity. we have done wickedly.
Our fathers did not understand thy wonders in Egypt. They did not remember the multitude of thy loving kindnesses, but were rebellious at the sea, even at the Red Sea.
Nevertheless he saved them for his name's sake, that he might make his mighty power to be known.
He also rebuked the Red Sea, and it was dried up. So he led them through the depths as through a wilderness.
And he saved them from the hand of him who hated them, and redeemed them from the hand of the enemy.
And the waters covered their adversaries; there was not one of them left.
Then they believed his words. They sang his praise.
They soon forgot his works. They did not wait for his counsel,
but lusted exceedingly in the wilderness, and challenged God in the desert.
And he gave them their request, but sent leanness into their soul.
They also envied Moses in the camp, and Aaron the sanctified of Jehovah.
The earth opened and swallowed up Dathan, and covered the company of Abiram.
And a fire was kindled in their company. The flame burned up the wicked men.
They made a calf in Horeb, and worshiped a molten image.
Thus they changed their glory for the likeness of an ox that eats grass.
They forgot God their Savior, who had done great things in Egypt,
wondrous works in the land of Ham, and fearful things by the Red Sea.
Therefore he said that he would destroy them, had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy.
Yea, they despised the pleasant land. They did not believe his word,
but murmured in their tents, and did not hearken to the voice of Jehovah.
Therefore he swore to them, that he would overthrow them in the wilderness,
and that he would overthrow their seed among the nations, and scatter them in the lands.
They also joined themselves to Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.
Thus they provoked him to anger with their doings, and the plague broke in upon them.
Then Phinehas stood up, and executed judgment, and so the plague was stayed.
And that was reckoned to him for righteousness to all generations for evermore.
They also angered him at the waters of Meribah, so that it went ill with Moses because of them,
because they were rebellious against his spirit, and he spoke ill-advisedly with his lips.
They did not destroy the peoples, as Jehovah commanded them,
but mingled themselves with the nations, and learned their works,
and served their idols, which became a snare to them.
Yea, they sacrificed their sons and their daughters to demons,
and shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed to the idols of Canaan. And the land was polluted with blood.
Thus they were defiled with their works, and played the harlot in their doings.
Therefore the wrath of Jehovah was kindled against his people, and he abhorred his inheritance.
And he gave them into the hand of the nations. And those who hated them ruled over them.
Their enemies also oppressed them, and they were brought into subjection under their hand.
Many times he delivered them, but they were rebellious in their counsel, and were brought low in their iniquity.
Nevertheless he regarded their distress when he heard their cry.
And he remembered his covenant for them, and relented according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses.
He also made them to be pitied by all those who carried them captive.
Save us, O Jehovah our God, and gather us from among the nations, to give thanks to thy holy name, and to triumph in thy praise.
Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting. And let all the people say, Truly. Praise ye Jehovah.

O give thanks to Jehovah, For he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
Let the redeemed of Jehovah say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the adversary,
and gathered out of the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north and from the south.
They wandered in the wilderness in a desert way. They found no city of habitation.
Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them.
Then they cried to Jehovah in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses.
He also led them by a straight way, that they might go to a city of habitation.
O that men would praise Jehovah for his loving kindness, and for his wonderful works to the sons of men!
For he satisfies the longing soul, and he fills the hungry soul with good,
even those who sat in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and iron,
because they rebelled against the words of God, and scorned the counsel of the Most High.
Therefore he brought down their heart with labor. They fell down, and there was none to help.
Then they cried to Jehovah in their trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses.
He brought them out of darkness and the shadow of death, and broke their bonds apart.
O that men would praise Jehovah for his loving kindness, and for his wonderful works to the sons of men!
For he has broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars of iron apart.
Fools are afflicted because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities.
Their soul abhors all manner of food, and they draw near to the gates of death.
Then they cry to Jehovah in their trouble, and he saves them out of their distresses.
He sends his word, and heals them, and delivers them from their destructions.
O that men would praise Jehovah for his loving kindness, and for his wonderful works to the sons of men!
And let them offer the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and declare his works with singing.
Those who go down to the sea in ships, who do business in great waters,
these men see the works of Jehovah, and his wonders in the deep.
For he commands, and raises the stormy wind, which lifts up the waves of it.
They mount up to the heavens, they go down again to the depths. Their soul melts away because of trouble.
They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and are at their wits' end.
Then they cry to Jehovah in their trouble, and he brings them out of their distresses.
He makes the storm a calm, so that the waves of it are still.
Then they are glad because they are quiet, so he brings them to their desired haven.
O that men would praise Jehovah for his loving kindness, and for his wonderful works to the sons of men!
Let them also exalt him in the assembly of the people, and praise him in the seat of the elders.
He turns rivers into a wilderness, and water springs into a thirsty ground,
a fruitful land into a salt desert, for the wickedness of those who dwell therein.
He turns a wilderness into a pool of water, and a dry land into water springs.
And there he makes the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a city of habitation,
and sow fields, and plant vineyards, and get fruits of increase.
He also blesses them, so that they are multiplied greatly, and he does not allow their cattle to decrease.
Again, they are diminished and bowed down through oppression, trouble, and sorrow.
He pours contempt upon rulers, and causes them to wander in the waste, where there is no way.
Yet he sets a needy man on high from affliction, and makes him families like a flock.
The upright shall see it, and be glad. And all iniquity shall stop her mouth.
He who is wise will give heed to these things, and they will consider the loving kindnesses of Jehovah.

My heart is fixed, O God, I will sing, yea, I will sing praises, even with my glory.
Awake, psaltery and harp. I myself will awake right early.
I will give thanks to thee, O Jehovah, among the peoples, and I will sing praises to thee among the nations.
For thy loving kindness is great above the heavens, and thy truth is to the skies.
Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory above all the earth.
That thy beloved may be delivered, save with thy right hand, and answer us.
God has spoken in his holiness. I will exult. I will divide Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.
Gilead is mine. Manasseh is mine. Ephraim also is the defense of my head. Judah is my scepter.
Moab is my wash pot. Upon Edom I will cast my shoe. Over Philistia I will shout.
Who will bring me into the fortified city? Who has led me to Edom?
Have thou not cast us off, O God? And thou go not forth, O God, with our armies.
Give us help against the adversary, for vain is the help of man.
Through God we shall do valiantly, for he it is who will tread down our adversaries.

Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise,
for they have opened against me the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of deceit. They have spoken to me with a lying tongue.
They have also encompassed me about with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause.
For my love they are my adversaries, but I make prayer.
And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.
Set thou a wicked man over him, and let an adversary stand at his right hand.
When he is judged, let him come forth guilty, and let his prayer be turned into sin.
Let his days be few, and let another take his office.
Let his sons be fatherless, and his wife a widow.
Let his sons be vagabonds, and beg, and let them seek out of their desolate places.
Let a creditor exact all that he has, and let strangers make spoil of his labor.
Let there be none to extend kindness to him, nor let there be any to have pity on his fatherless sons.
Let his posterity be cut off. In the generation following let their name be blotted out.
Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with Jehovah, and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out.
Let them be before Jehovah continually, that he may cut off the memory of them from the earth,
because he did not remember to show kindness, but persecuted the poor and needy man, and the broken in heart, to kill.
Yea, he loved cursing, and it came to him. And he did not delight in blessing, and it was far from him.
He also clothed himself with cursing as with his garment, and it came into his inward parts like water, and like oil into his bones.
Let it be to him as the raiment with which he covers himself, and for the belt with which he is girded continually.
This is the reward of my adversaries from Jehovah, and of those who speak evil against my soul.
But deal thou with me, O Jehovah the Lord, for thy name's sake. Because thy loving kindness is good, deliver thou me,
for I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.
I am gone like the shadow when it declines. I am tossed up and down as the locust.
My knees are weak through fasting, and my flesh fails of fatness.
I also have become a reproach to them. When they see me, they shake their head.
Help me, O Jehovah my God. O save me according to thy loving kindness,
that they may know that this is thy hand, that thou, Jehovah, have done it.
Let them curse, but bless thou. When they arise, they shall be put to shame, but thy servant shall rejoice.
Let my adversaries be clothed with dishonor, and let them cover themselves with their own shame as with a robe.
I will give great thanks to Jehovah with my mouth. Yea, I will praise him among the multitude.
For he will stand at the right hand of the needy, to save him from those who judge his soul.

Jehovah says to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool.
Jehovah will send forth the rod of thy strength out of Zion. Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies.
Thy people offer themselves willingly in the day of thy power, in holy array. Out of the womb of the morning thou have the dew of thy youth.
Jehovah has sworn, and will not repent. Thou are a priest forever after the order of Melchizedek.
The Lord at thy right hand will strike through kings in the day of his wrath.
He will judge among the nations. He will fill with dead bodies. He will strike through the head in many countries.
He will drink of the brook in the way, therefore he will lift up the head.

Praise ye Jehovah. I will give thanks to Jehovah with my whole heart, in the council of the upright, and in the congregation.
The works of Jehovah are great, sought out by all those who have pleasure in it.
His work is honor and majesty, and his righteousness endures forever.
He has made his wonderful works to be remembered. Jehovah is gracious and merciful.
He has given food to those who fear him. He will ever be mindful of his covenant.
He has shown his people the power of his works, in giving them the heritage of the nations.
The works of his hands are truth and justice. All his precepts are sure.
They are established forever and ever. They are done in truth and uprightness.
He has sent redemption to his people. He has commanded his covenant forever. Holy and reverend is his name.
The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom, and all who act accordingly have a good understanding. His praise endures forever.

Praise ye Jehovah. Blessed is the man who fears Jehovah, who delights greatly in his commandments.
His seed shall be mighty upon earth. The generation of the upright shall be blessed.
Wealth and riches are in his house, and his righteousness endures forever.
To the upright there arises light in the darkness. He is gracious, and merciful, and righteous.
It is well with the man who deals graciously and lends. He shall maintain his cause in judgment,
for he shall never be moved. A righteous man shall be had in everlasting remembrance.
He shall not be afraid of evil tidings. His heart is fixed, trusting in Jehovah.
His heart is established, he shall not be afraid, even until he looks over his adversaries.
He has scattered, he has given to the poor. His righteousness endures forever. His horn shall be exalted with honor.
A wicked man shall see it, and be grieved. He shall gnash with his teeth, and melt away. The desire of wicked men shall perish.

Praise ye Jehovah. Praise, O ye servants of Jehovah. Praise the name of Jehovah.
Blessed be the name of Jehovah from this time forth and for evermore.
From the rising of the sun to the going down of the same Jehovah's name is to be praised.
Jehovah is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens.
Who is like Jehovah our God who has his seat on high,
and yet looks upon the low things in heaven and in the earth.
He raises up a poor man out of the dust, and lifts up a needy man from the dunghill,
that he may set him with rulers, even with the rulers of his people.
He makes the barren woman to keep house, a joyful mother of sons. Praise ye Jehovah.

When Israel went forth out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language,
Judah became his sanctuary, Israel his dominion.
The sea saw it, and fled. The Jordan was driven back.
The mountains skipped like rams, the little hills like lambs.
What ails thee, O thou sea, that thou flee? Thou Jordan, that thou turn back?
Ye mountains, that ye skip like rams, ye little hills, like lambs?
Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Jacob,
who turned the rock into a pool of water, the flint into a fountain of waters.

Not to us, O Jehovah, not to us, but to thy name give glory. For thy loving kindness, and for thy truth's sake.
Why should the nations say, Where is now their God?
But our God is in the heavens. He has done whatever he pleased.
Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but they speak not. They have eyes, but they see not.
They have ears, but they hear not. They have noses, but they smell not.
They have hands, but they handle not. They have feet, but they walk not, nor do they speak through their throat.
Those who make them shall be like them. Yea, everyone who trusts in them.
O Israel, trust thou in Jehovah. He is their help and their shield.
O house of Aaron, trust ye in Jehovah. He is their help and their shield.
Ye who fear Jehovah, trust in Jehovah. He is their help and their shield.
Jehovah has been mindful of us. He will bless, he will bless the house of Israel. He will bless the house of Aaron.
He will bless those who fear Jehovah, both small and great.
Jehovah increase you more and more, you and your sons.
Blessed are ye of Jehovah who made heaven and earth.
The heavens are the heavens of Jehovah, but the earth he has given to the sons of men.
The dead do not praise Jehovah, nor any who go down into silence,
but we will bless Jehovah from this time forth and for evermore. Praise ye Jehovah.

I love Jehovah because he hears my voice and my supplications.
Because he has inclined his ear to me, therefore I will call as long as I live.
The cords of death encompassed me, and the pains of Sheol got hold upon me. I found trouble and sorrow.
Then I called upon the name of Jehovah. O Jehovah, I beseech thee, deliver my soul.
Gracious is Jehovah, and righteous. Yea, our God is merciful.
Jehovah preserves the simple. I was brought low, and he saved me.
Return to thy rest, O my soul, for Jehovah has dealt bountifully with thee.
For thou have delivered my soul from death, my eyes from tears, my feet from falling.
I will walk before Jehovah in the land of the living.
I believed, therefore I have spoken, but I was greatly afflicted.
I said in my haste, All men are liars.
What shall I render to Jehovah for all his benefits toward me?
I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of Jehovah.
I will pay my vows to Jehovah, yea, in the presence of all his people.
Precious in the sight of Jehovah is the death of his sanctified.
O Jehovah, truly I am thy servant. I am thy servant, the son of thy handmaid. Thou have loosed my bonds.
I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the name of Jehovah.
I will pay my vows to Jehovah, yea, in the presence of all his people,
in the courts of Jehovah's house, in the midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise ye Jehovah.

O praise Jehovah, all ye Gentiles, laud him, all ye peoples.
For his loving kindness is great toward us, and the truth of Jehovah is forever. Praise ye Jehovah.

O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
Let Israel now say that his loving kindness is forever.
Let the house of Aaron now say that his loving kindness is forever.
Let those now who fear Jehovah say that his loving kindness is forever.
Out of my distress I called upon Jehovah. Jehovah answered me upon a large place.
Jehovah is on my side, I will not fear. What can man do to me?
Jehovah is on my side among those who help me. Therefore I shall look upon those who hate me.
It is better to take refuge in Jehovah than to put confidence in man.
It is better to take refuge in Jehovah than to put confidence in rulers.
All nations encompassed me around. In the name of Jehovah I will cut them off.
They encompassed me around, yea, they encompassed me around. In the name of Jehovah I will cut them off.
They encompassed me around like bees. They are quenched as the fire of thorns. In the name of Jehovah I will cut them off.
Thou thrusted greatly at me that I might fall, but Jehovah helped me.
Jehovah is my strength and song, and he has become my salvation.
The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tents of the righteous. The right hand of Jehovah does valiantly.
The right hand of Jehovah is exalted. The right hand of Jehovah does valiantly.
I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of Jehovah.
Jehovah has chastened me greatly, but he has not given me over to death.
Open to me the gates of righteousness. I will enter into them. I will give thanks to Jehovah.
This is the gate of Jehovah. The righteous shall enter into it.
I will give thanks to thee, for thou have answered me, and have become my salvation.
The stone which the builders rejected has become the head of the corner.
This is Jehovah's doing. It is marvelous in our eyes.
This is the day which Jehovah has made. We will rejoice and be glad in it.
Save now, we beseech thee, O Jehovah. O Jehovah, we beseech thee, send now prosperity.
Blessed be he who comes in the name of Jehovah. We have blessed you out of the house of Jehovah.
Jehovah is God, and he has given us light. Bind the sacrifice with cords, even to the horns of the altar.
Thou are my God, and I will give thanks to thee. Thou are my God, I will exalt thee.
O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.

Blessed are those who are perfect in the way, who walk in the law of Jehovah.
Blessed are those who keep his testimonies, that seek him with the whole heart.
Yea, they do no unrighteousness. They walk in his ways.
Thou have commanded thy precepts, that we should observe them diligently.
O that my ways were established to observe thy statutes!
Then I shall not be put to shame when I have respect for all thy commandments.
I will give thanks to thee with uprightness of heart when I learn thy righteous judgments.
I will observe thy statutes. O forsake me not utterly.
With what shall a young man cleanse his way? By taking heed according to thy word.
With my whole heart I have sought thee. O let me not wander from thy commandments.
I have laid thy word up in my heart that I might not sin against thee.
Blessed are thou, O Jehovah. Teach me thy statutes.
With my lips I have declared all the ordinances of thy mouth.
I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies as much as in all riches.
I will meditate on thy precepts, and have respect for thy ways.
I will delight myself in thy statutes. I will not forget thy word.
Deal bountifully with thy servant that I may live, so I will observe thy word.
Open thou my eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.
I am a sojourner in the earth. Hide not thy commandments from me.
My soul breaks for the longing that it has to thine ordinances at all times.
Thou have rebuked the proud, who are cursed, who wander from thy commandments.
Take away from me reproach and contempt, for I have kept thy testimonies.
Rulers also sat and talked against me, but thy servant meditated on thy statutes.
Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counselors.
My soul clings to the dust. Enliven thou me according to thy word.
I declared my ways, and thou answered me. Teach me thy statutes.
Make me to understand the way of thy precepts, so I shall meditate on thy wondrous works.
My soul melts for heaviness. Strengthen thou me according to thy word.
Remove from me the way of falsehood, and grant me thy law graciously.
I have chosen the way of faithfulness. I have set thine ordinances.
I cling to thy testimonies. O Jehovah, put me not to shame.
I will run the way of thy commandments when thou shall enlarge my heart.
Teach me, O Jehovah, the way of thy statutes, and I shall keep it to the end.
Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law, yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart.
Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for therein do I delight.
Incline my heart to thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.
Turn away my eyes from beholding vanity, and enliven me in thy ways.
Confirm to thy servant thy word, which is for the fear of thee.
Turn away my reproach of which I am afraid, for thine ordinances are good.
Behold, I have longed after thy precepts. Enliven me in thy righteousness.
Let thy loving kindnesses also come to me, O Jehovah, even thy salvation, according to thy word.
So I shall have an answer for him who reproaches me, for I trust in thy word.
And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth, for I have hoped in thine ordinances.
So shall I observe thy law continually forever and ever.
And I shall walk at liberty, for I have sought thy precepts.
I also will speak of thy testimonies before kings, and shall not be put to shame.
And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have loved.
I will also lift up my hands to thy commandments, which I have loved, and I will meditate on thy statutes.
Remember the word to thy servant, because thou have made me to hope.
This is my comfort in my affliction, for thy word has revived me.
The proud have had me greatly in derision, yet I have not swerved from thy law.
I have remembered thine ordinances of old, O Jehovah, and have comforted myself.
Hot indignation has taken hold upon me because of the wicked who forsake thy law.
Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.
I have remembered thy name, O Jehovah, in the night, and have observed thy law.
This I have had because I have kept thy precepts.
Jehovah is my portion; I have said that I would observe thy words.
I entreated thy favor with my whole heart. Be merciful to me according to thy word.
I thought on my ways, and turned my feet to thy testimonies.
I made haste, and delayed not, to observe thy commandments.
The cords of the wicked have wrapped me around, but I have not forgotten thy law.
At midnight I will rise to give thanks to thee because of thy righteous ordinances.
I am a companion of all those who fear thee, and of those who observe thy precepts.
The earth, O Jehovah, is full of thy loving kindness. Teach me thy statutes.
Thou have dealt well with thy servant, O Jehovah, according to thy word.
Teach me good judgment and knowledge, for I have believed in thy commandments.
Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now I observe thy word.
Thou are good, and do good. Teach me thy statutes.
The proud have forged a lie against me. With my whole heart I will keep thy precepts.
Their heart is as fat as grease, but I delight in thy law.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I may learn thy statutes.
The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver.
Thy hands have made me and fashioned me. Give me understanding that I may learn thy commandments.
Those who fear thee shall see me and be glad, because I have hoped in thy word.
I know, O Jehovah, that thy judgments are righteous, and that in faithfulness thou have afflicted me.
Let, I pray thee, thy loving kindness be for my comfort according to thy word to thy servant.
Let thy tender mercies come to me that I may live, for thy law is my delight.
Let the proud be put to shame, for they have overthrown me wrongfully. I will meditate on thy precepts.
Let those who fear thee turn to me, and they shall know thy testimonies.
Let my heart be perfect in thy statutes that I be not put to shame.
My soul faints for thy salvation. I hope in thy word.
My eyes fail for thy word, while I say, When will thou comfort me?
For I have become like a wine-skin in the smoke. Yet I do not forget thy statutes.
How many are the days of thy servant? When will thou execute judgment on those who persecute me?
The proud have dug pits for me, who are not according to thy law.
All thy commandments are faithful. They persecute me wrongfully. Help thou me.
They had almost consumed me upon earth, but I did not forsake thy precepts.
Revive me according to thy loving kindness, so I shall observe the testimony of thy mouth.
Forever, O Jehovah, thy word is settled in heaven.
Thy faithfulness is to all generations. Thou have established the earth, and it abides.
They abide this day according to thine ordinances, for all things are thy servants.
Unless thy law had been my delight, I should then have perished in my affliction.
I will never forget thy precepts, for with them thou have enlivened me.
I am thine. Save me, for I have sought thy precepts.
The wicked have waited for me, to destroy me. I will consider thy testimonies.
I have seen an end of all perfection. Thy commandment is exceedingly broad.
O how I love thy law! It is my meditation all the day.
Thy commandments make me wiser than my enemies, for they are ever with me.
I have more understanding than all my teachers, for thy testimonies are my meditation.
I understand more than the aged because I have kept thy precepts.
I have restrained my feet from every evil way, that I might observe thy word.
I have not turned aside from thine ordinances, for thou have taught me.
How sweet are thy words to my taste, than honey to my mouth!
Through thy precepts I get understanding. Therefore I hate every false way.
Thy word is a lamp to my feet, and light to my path.
I have sworn, and have confirmed it, that I will observe thy righteous ordinances.
I am afflicted very much. Revive me, O Jehovah, according to thy word.
Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Jehovah, and teach me thine ordinances.
My soul is continually in my hand, yet I do not forget thy law.
The wicked have laid a snare for me, yet I have not gone astray from thy precepts.
I have taken thy testimonies as a heritage forever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart.
I have inclined my heart to perform thy statutes forever, even to the end.
I hate those who are of a double mind, but I love thy law.
Thou are my hiding place and my shield. I hope in thy word.
Depart from me, ye evildoers, that I may keep the commandments of my God.
Uphold me according to thy word, that I may live, and let me not be ashamed of my hope.
Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe, and shall have respect for thy statutes continually.
Thou have set at nothing all those who err from thy statutes, for their deceit is falsehood.
Thou put away all the wicked of the earth like dross. Therefore I love thy testimonies.
My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy judgments.
I have done justice and righteousness. Leave me not to my oppressors.
Be surety for thy servant for good. Let not the proud oppress me.
My eyes fail for thy salvation, and for thy righteous word.
Deal with thy servant according to thy loving kindness, and teach me thy statutes.
I am thy servant. Give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies.
It is time for Jehovah to work. They have made void thy law.
Therefore I love thy commandments above gold, yea, above fine gold.
Therefore I esteem all precepts concerning all things to be right. I hate every false way.
Thy testimonies are wonderful, therefore my soul keeps them.
The opening of thy words gives light. It gives understanding to the simple.
I opened wide my mouth, and panted, for I longed for thy commandments.
Turn thee to me, and have mercy upon me, as thou used to do to those who love thy name.
Establish my footsteps in thy word, and let not any iniquity have dominion over me.
Redeem me from the oppression of man, so I will observe thy precepts.
Make thy face to shine upon thy servant, and teach me thy statutes.
Streams of water run down my eyes, because they do not observe thy law.
Thou are righteous, O Jehovah, and upright are thy judgments.
Thou have commanded thy testimonies in righteousness and exceeding faithfulness.
My zeal has consumed me, because my adversaries have forgotten thy words.
Thy word is very pure, therefore thy servant loves it.
I am small and despised. I do not forget thy precepts.
Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is truth.
Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me. Thy commandments are my delight.
Thy testimonies are righteous forever. Give me understanding, and I shall live.
I have called with my whole heart. Answer me, O Jehovah. I will keep thy statutes.
I have called to thee. Save me, and I shall observe thy testimonies.
I anticipated the dawning of the morning, and cried. I hoped in thy words.
My eyes anticipated the night-watches that I might meditate on thy word.
Hear my voice according to thy loving kindness. Enliven me, O Jehovah, according to thine ordinances.
They draw near who follow after wickedness. They are far from thy law.
Thou are near, O Jehovah, and all thy commandments are truth.
Of old I have known from thy testimonies that thou have founded them forever.
Consider my affliction, and deliver me, for I do not forget thy law.
Plead thou my cause, and redeem me. Enliven me according to thy word.
Salvation is far from the wicked, for they seek not thy statutes.
Great are thy tender mercies, O Jehovah. Enliven me according to thine ordinances.
Many are my persecutors and my adversaries. I have not swerved from thy testimonies.
I beheld the treacherous, and was grieved because they do not observe thy word.
Consider how I love thy precepts. Enliven me, O Jehovah, according to thy loving kindness.
The sum of thy word is truth, and every one of thy righteous ordinances is forever.
Rulers have persecuted me without a cause, but my heart stands in awe of thy words.
I rejoice at thy word, as he who finds great spoil.
I hate and abhor falsehood. I love thy law.
Seven times a day I praise thee because of thy righteous ordinances.
Great peace have those who love thy law, and they have no occasion of stumbling.
I have hoped for thy salvation, O Jehovah, and have done thy commandments.
My soul has observed thy testimonies, and I love them exceedingly.
I have observed thy precepts and thy testimonies, for all my ways are before thee.
Let my cry come near before thee, O Jehovah. Give me understanding according to thy word.
Let my supplication come before thee. Deliver me according to thy word.
Let my lips utter praise, for thou teach me thy statutes.
Let my tongue sing of thy word, for all thy commandments are righteousness.
Let thy hand be ready to help me, for I have chosen thy precepts.
I have longed for thy salvation, O Jehovah, and thy law is my delight.
Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee. And let thine ordinances help me.
I have gone astray like a lost sheep. Seek thy servant, for I do not forget thy commandments.

In my distress I cried to Jehovah, and he answered me.
Deliver my soul, O Jehovah, from lying lips, from a deceitful tongue.
What shall be given to thee, and what shall be done more to thee, thou deceitful tongue?
Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper.
Woe is me, that I sojourn in Meshech, that I dwell among the tents of Kedar!
My soul has long had her dwelling with him who hates peace.
I am for peace, but when I speak, they are for war.

I will lift up my eyes to the mountains. From where shall my help come?
My help is from Jehovah, who made heaven and earth.
He will not allow thy foot to be moved. He who keeps thee will not slumber.
Behold, he who keeps Israel will neither slumber nor sleep.
Jehovah is thy keeper. Jehovah is thy shade upon thy right hand.
The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.
Jehovah will keep thee from all evil. He will keep thy soul.
Jehovah will keep thy going out and thy coming in from this time forth and for evermore.

I was glad when they said to me, Let us go to the house of Jehovah.
Our feet are standing inside thy gates, O Jerusalem.
Jerusalem, that is built as a city that is compact together,
where the tribes go up, even the tribes of Jehovah, for an ordinance for Israel, to give thanks to the name of Jehovah.
For there thrones are set for judgment, the thrones of the house of David.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. They shall prosper who love thee.
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.
For my brothers and companions' sakes I will now say, Peace be within thee.
For the sake of the house of Jehovah our God I will seek thy good.

To thee do I lift up my eyes, O thou who sit in the heavens.
Behold, as the eyes of servants to the hand of their master, as the eyes of a maid to the hand of her mistress, so our eyes are to Jehovah our God, until he has mercy upon us.
Have mercy upon us, O Jehovah, have mercy upon us, for we are exceedingly filled with contempt.
Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scoffing of those who are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud.

If it had not been Jehovah who was on our side, let Israel now say,
if it had not been Jehovah who was on our side when men rose up against us,
then they would have swallowed us up alive when their wrath was kindled against us,
then the waters would have overwhelmed us, the stream would have gone over our soul,
then the proud waters would have gone over our soul.
Blessed be Jehovah, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth.
Our soul has escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers. The snare is broken, and we have escaped.
Our help is in the name of Jehovah, who made heaven and earth.

Those who trust in Jehovah are as mount Zion, which cannot be moved, but abides forever.
As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so Jehovah is round about his people from this time forth and for evermore.
For the scepter of wickedness shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous, that the righteous not put forth their hands to iniquity.
Do good, O Jehovah, to those who are good, and to those who are upright in their hearts.
But as for such as turn aside to their crooked ways, Jehovah will lead them forth with the workers of iniquity. Peace be upon Israel.

When Jehovah brought back those who returned to Zion, we were like those who dream.
Then our mouth was filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing. Then they said among the nations, Jehovah has done great things for them.
Jehovah has done great things for us. We are glad.
Turn again our captivity, O Jehovah, as the streams in the South.
Those who sow in tears shall reap in joy.
He who goes forth and weeps, bearing seed for sowing, shall doubtless come again with joy, bringing his sheaves.

Unless Jehovah builds the house, they labor in vain who build it. Unless Jehovah guards the city, the watchman wake but in vain.
It is vain for you to rise up early, to take rest late, to eat the bread of toil, for so he gives sleep to his beloved.
Lo, sons are a heritage of Jehovah, and the fruit of the womb is a reward.
As arrows in the hand of a mighty man, so are the sons of youth.
Happy is the man who has his quiver full of them. They shall not be put to shame when they speak with their enemies in the gate.

Blessed are all who fear Jehovah, who walk in his ways.
For thou shall eat the labor of thy hands. Happy thou shall be, and it shall be well with thee.
Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine in the innermost parts of thy house, thy sons like olive plants round about thy table.
Behold, thus shall the man be blessed who fears Jehovah.
Jehovah bless thee out of Zion, and see thou the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life.
Yea, see thou thy son's sons. Peace be upon Israel.

Many a time they have afflicted me from my youth up. Let Israel now say,
Many a time they have afflicted me from my youth up, yet they have not prevailed against me.
The plowers plowed upon my back. They made long their furrows.
Jehovah is righteous. He has cut apart the cords of the wicked.
Let them be put to shame and turned backward, all those who hate Zion.
Let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which withers before it grows up,
with which the reaper fills not his hand, nor he who binds sheaves, his bosom.
Neither do those who go by say, The blessing of Jehovah be upon you. We bless you in the name of Jehovah.

Out of the depths I have cried to thee, O Jehovah.
Lord, hear my voice. Let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my supplications.
If thou, Jehovah, should note iniquities, O Lord, who could stand?
But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.
I wait for Jehovah. My soul waits, and in his word do I hope,
my soul for the Lord more than watchmen for the morning, watchmen for the morning.
O Israel, hope in Jehovah, for with Jehovah there is loving kindness, and with him is plentiful redemption.
And he will redeem Israel from all his iniquities.

Jehovah, my heart is not haughty, nor my eyes lofty. Neither do I exercise myself in grand matters, or in things too wonderful for me.
Surely I have stilled and quieted my soul like a weaned child with his mother. Like a weaned child is my soul within me.
O Israel, hope in Jehovah from this time forth and for evermore.

Jehovah, remember for David all his affliction,
Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed,
I will not give sleep to my eyes, or slumber to my eyelids,
until I find out a place for Jehovah, a tabernacle for the Mighty One of Jacob.
Lo, we heard of it in Ephrathah. We found it in the field of the wood.
We will go into his tabernacles. We will worship at his footstool.
Arise, O Jehovah, into thy resting-place, thou, and the ark of thy strength.
Let thy priest be clothed with righteousness, and let thy sanctified shout for joy.
For thy servant David's sake turn not away the face of thine anointed.
From the fruit of thy body I will set upon thy throne.
If thy sons will keep my covenant and my testimony that I shall teach them, their sons also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore.
For Jehovah has chosen Zion. He has desired it for his habitation.
This is my resting place forever. Here I will dwell, for I have desired it.
I will abundantly bless her provision. I will satisfy her poor with bread.
I will also clothe her priests with salvation, and her sanctified shall shout aloud for joy.
There I will make the horn of David to bud. I have ordained a lamp for my anointed.
I will clothe his enemies with shame, but upon himself his crown shall flourish.

Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brothers to dwell together in unity!
It is like the precious oil upon the head, that ran down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard, that came down upon the skirt of his garments,
like the dew of Hermon, that comes down upon the mountains of Zion. For there Jehovah commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.

Behold, bless ye Jehovah, all ye servants of Jehovah, who stand by night in the house of Jehovah.
Lift up your hands to the sanctuary, and bless ye Jehovah.
Jehovah bless thee out of Zion, even he who made heaven and earth.

Praise ye Jehovah. Praise ye the name of Jehovah. Praise, O ye servants of Jehovah,
ye who stand in the house of Jehovah, in the courts of the house of our God.
Praise ye Jehovah, for Jehovah is good. Sing praises to his name, for it is pleasant.
For Jehovah has chosen Jacob to himself, Israel for his own possession.
For I know that Jehovah is great, and that our Lord is above all gods.
Whatever Jehovah pleased, that he has done, in heaven and in earth, in the seas and in all deeps,
who causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth, who makes lightnings for the rain, who brings forth the wind out of his treasuries,
who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast,
who sent signs and wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants,
who smote many nations, and killed mighty kings-
Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan-
and gave their land for a heritage, a heritage to Israel his people.
Thy name, O Jehovah, is forever, thy memorial, O Jehovah, throughout all generations.
For Jehovah will judge his people, and will relent concerning his servants.
The idols of the nations are silver and gold, the work of men's hands.
They have mouths, but they speak not. They have eyes, but they see not.
They have ears, but they hear not, nor is there any breath in their mouths.
Those who make them shall be like them, yea, everyone who trusts in them.
O house of Israel, bless ye Jehovah. O house of Aaron, bless ye Jehovah.
O house of Levi, bless ye Jehovah. Ye who fear Jehovah, bless ye Jehovah.
Blessed be Jehovah out of Zion, who dwells at Jerusalem. Praise ye Jehovah.

O give thanks to Jehovah, for he is good, for his loving kindness is forever.
O give thanks to the God of gods, for his loving kindness is forever.
O give thanks to the Lord of lords, for his loving kindness is forever,
to him who alone does great wonders, for his loving kindness is forever,
to him who by understanding made the heavens, for his loving kindness is forever,
to him who spread forth the earth above the waters, for his loving kindness is forever,
to him who made great lights, for his loving kindness is forever,
the sun to rule by day, for his loving kindness is forever,
the moon and stars to rule by night, for his loving kindness is forever,
to him who smote Egypt in their firstborn, for his loving kindness is forever,
and brought out Israel from among them, for his loving kindness is forever,
with a strong hand, and with an outstretched arm, for his loving kindness is forever,
to him who divided the Red Sea apart, for his loving kindness is forever,
and made Israel to pass through the midst of it, for his loving kindness is forever,
but overthrew Pharaoh and his army in the Red Sea, for his loving kindness is forever,
to him who led his people through the wilderness, for his loving kindness is forever,
to him who smote great kings, for his loving kindness is forever,
and killed famous kings, for his loving kindness is forever,
Sihon king of the Amorites, for his loving kindness is forever,
and Og king of Bashan, for his loving kindness is forever,
and gave their land for a heritage, for his loving kindness is forever,
even a heritage to Israel his servant, for his loving kindness is forever,
who remembered us in our low estate, for his loving kindness is forever,
and has delivered us from our adversaries, for his loving kindness is forever,
who gives food to all flesh, for his loving kindness is forever.
O give thanks to the God of heaven, for his loving kindness is forever.

By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept when we remembered Zion.
Upon the willows in the midst of it we hung up our harps.
For there those who led us captive required of us songs, and those who wasted us, mirth, saying, Sing for us one of the songs of Zion.
How shall we sing Jehovah's song in a foreign land?
If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget.
Let my tongue cling to the roof of my mouth, if I do not remember thee, if I do not prefer Jerusalem above my chief joy.
Remember, O Jehovah, the day of Jerusalem against the sons of Edom, who said, Raze it, raze it, even to the foundation thereof.
O daughter of Babylon, who is to be destroyed, happy shall he be who rewards thee as thou have served us.
Happy shall he be who takes and dashes thy little ones against the rock.

I will give thee thanks with my whole heart. I will sing praises to thee before the gods.
I will worship toward thy holy temple, and give thanks to thy name for thy loving kindness and for thy truth. For thou have magnified thy word above all thy name.
Thou answered me in the day that I called. Thou encouraged me with strength in my soul.
All the kings of the earth shall give thee thanks, O Jehovah, for they have heard the words of thy mouth.
Yea, they shall sing of the ways of Jehovah, for great is the glory of Jehovah.
For though Jehovah is high, yet he has respect to the lowly. But he knows the haughty from afar.
Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou will revive me. Thou will stretch forth thy hand against the wrath of my enemies, and thy right hand will save me.
Jehovah will perfect that which concerns me. Thy loving kindness, O Jehovah, is forever. Forsake not the works of thine own hands.

O Jehovah, thou have searched me, and known.
Thou know my sitting down and my rising up. Thou understand my thought afar off.
Thou search out my path and my lying down, and are acquainted with all my ways.
For there is not a word in my tongue, but, lo, O Jehovah, thou know it altogether.
Thou have beset me behind and before, and laid thy hand upon me.
Such knowledge is too wonderful for me. It is high, I cannot attain to it.
Where shall I go from thy Spirit? Or where shall I flee from thy presence?
If I ascend up into heaven, thou are there. If I make my bed in Sheol, behold, thou are there.
If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the outermost parts of the sea,
even there thy hand shall lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me.
If I say, Surely the darkness shall overwhelm me, and the light around me shall be night,
even the darkness hides not from thee, but the night shines as the day. The darkness and the light are both alike to thee.
For thou formed my inward parts. Thou covered me in my mother's womb.
I will give thanks to thee, for I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Wonderful are thy works, and that my soul knows right well.
My frame was not hidden from thee, when I was made in secret, curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth.
Thine eyes saw my unformed substance, and in thy book they were all written, even the days that were ordained, when as yet there was none of them.
How precious also are thy thoughts to me, O God! How great is the sum of them!
I count them; they are more in number than the sand. When I awake, I am still with thee.
Surely thou will kill the wicked, O God. Depart from me therefore, ye bloodthirsty men.
For they speak against thee wickedly, and thine enemies take it in vain.
Do I not hate them, O Jehovah, who hate thee? And am I not grieved with those who rise up against thee?
I hate them with perfect hatred. They have become my enemies.
Search me, O God, and know my heart. Try me, and know my thoughts,
and see if there is any wicked way in me. And lead me in the way everlasting.

Deliver me, O Jehovah, from the evil man. Preserve me from the violent man,
and men who devise mischievous things in their heart. They gather themselves continually together for war.
They have sharpened their tongue like a serpent. Adders' poison is under their lips. Selah.
Keep me, O Jehovah, from the hands of a wicked man. Preserve me from violent men, who have purposed to thrust aside my steps.
The proud have hid a snare for me, and cords. They have spread a net by the wayside. They have set snares for me. Selah.
I said to Jehovah, Thou are my God. Give ear to the voice of my supplications, O Jehovah.
O Jehovah the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou have covered my head in the day of battle.
Grant not, O Jehovah, the desires of the wicked man. Do not further his evil device. They exalt themselves. Selah.
As for the head of those who encompass me around, let the mischief of their own lips cover them.
Let burning coals fall upon them. Let them be cast into the fire, into deep pits, from where they shall not rise.
An evil speaker shall not be established in the earth. Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him.
I know that Jehovah will maintain the cause of the afflicted man, and justice for the needy.
Surely the righteous shall give thanks to thy name. The upright shall dwell in thy presence.

Jehovah, I have called upon thee. Make haste to me. Give ear to my voice when I call to thee.
Let my prayer be set forth as incense before thee, the lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.
Set a watch, O Jehovah, before my mouth. Keep the door of my lips.
Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practice deeds of wickedness with men who work iniquity. And let me not eat of their dainties.
Let a righteous man smite me, as a kindness. And let him reprove me, as oil upon the head. Let not my head refuse it. For even in their wickedness my prayer shall continue.
Their judges are thrown down by the sides of the rock. And they shall hear my words, for they are sweet.
Like plowing and furrowing the earth, our bones are scattered at the mouth of Sheol.
For my eyes are to thee, O Jehovah the Lord. In thee do I take refuge. Leave not my soul destitute.
Keep me from the snare which they have laid for me, and from the traps of the workers of iniquity.
Let the wicked fall into their own nets, while I pass over.

I cry with my voice to Jehovah. With my voice to Jehovah I make supplication.
I pour out my complaint before him. I show my trouble before him.
When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, thou knew my path. In the way in which I walk they have hidden a snare for me.
Look on my right hand, and see, for there is no man who knows me. Refuge has failed me. No man cares for my soul.
I cried to thee, O Jehovah. I said, Thou are my refuge, my portion in the land of the living.
Attend to my cry, for I am brought very low. Deliver me from my persecutors, for they are stronger than I.
Bring my soul out of prison that I may give thanks to thy name. The righteous shall encompass me around, for thou will deal bountifully with me.

Hear my prayer, O Jehovah. Give ear to my supplications. In thy faithfulness answer me, and in thy righteousness.
And enter not into judgment with thy servant. For in thy sight no man living is righteous.
For the enemy has persecuted my soul. He has smitten my life down to the ground. He has made me to dwell in dark places as those who have been long dead.
Therefore my spirit is overwhelmed within me. My heart within me is desolate.
I remember the days of old. I meditate on all thy doings. I muse on the work of thy hands.
I spread forth my hands to thee. My soul is as a weary land for thee. Selah.
Make haste to answer me, O Jehovah, my spirit fails. Hide not thy face from me, lest I become like those who go down into the pit.
Cause me to hear thy loving kindness in the morning, for in thee do I trust. Cause me to know the way in which I should walk, for I lift up my soul to thee.
Deliver me, O Jehovah, from my enemies. I flee to thee to hide me.
Teach me to do thy will, for thou are my God. Thy Spirit is good, lead me in the land of uprightness.
Revive me, O Jehovah, for thy name's sake. In thy righteousness bring my soul out of trouble.
And in thy loving kindness cut off my enemies, and destroy all those who afflict my soul, for I am thy servant.

Blessed be Jehovah, my rock, who teaches my hands to war, and my fingers to fight,
my loving kindness, and my fortress, my high tower, and my deliverer, my shield, and he in whom I take refuge, who subdues my people under me.
Jehovah, what is man, that thou take knowledge of him? Or the son of man, that thou make account of him?
Man is like vanity. His days are as a shadow that passes away.
Bow thy heavens, O Jehovah, and come down. Touch the mountains, and they shall smoke.
Cast forth lightning, and scatter them. Send out thine arrows, and discomfit them.
Stretch forth thy hand from above. Rescue me, and deliver me out of great waters, out of the hand of aliens,
whose mouth speaks deceit, and whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood.
I will sing a new song to thee, O God. Upon a psaltery of ten strings I will sing praises to thee.
Thou are he who gives salvation to kings, who rescues David his servant from the hurtful sword.
Rescue me, and deliver me out of the hand of aliens, whose mouth speaks deceit, and whose right hand is a right hand of falsehood.
That our sons shall be as plants grown up in their youth, and our daughters as cornerstones hewn according to the fashion of a palace,
our garners are full, affording all manner of store, our sheep bring forth thousands and ten thousands in our fields,
our oxen are well laden, no breaking in, and no going forth, and no outcry in our streets,
blessed are the people who are in such a case. Blessed are the people whose God is Jehovah.

I will extol thee, my God, O King, and I will bless thy name forever and ever.
Every day I will bless thee, and I will praise thy name forever and ever.
Great is Jehovah, and greatly to be praised, and his greatness is unsearchable.
One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy mighty acts.
I will meditate on the glorious majesty of thine honor, and of thy wondrous works.
And men shall speak of the might of thy fearful acts, and I will declare thy greatness.
They shall utter the memory of thy great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness.
Jehovah is gracious, and merciful, slow to anger, and of great loving kindness.
Jehovah is good to all, and his tender mercies are over all his works.
All thy works shall give thanks to thee, O Jehovah, and thy sanctified shall bless thee.
They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power,
to make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glory of the majesty of his kingdom.
Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion is throughout all generations.
Jehovah upholds all who fall, and raises up all those who are bowed down.
The eyes of all wait for thee, and thou give them their food in due season.
Thou open thy hand, and satisfy the desire of every living thing.
Jehovah is righteous in all his ways, and gracious in all his works.
Jehovah is near to all those who call upon him, to all who call upon him in truth.
He will fulfill the desire of those who fear him. He also will hear their cry and will save them.
Jehovah preserves all those who love him, but he will destroy all the wicked.
My mouth shall speak the praise of Jehovah. And let all flesh bless his holy name forever and ever.

Praise ye Jehovah. Praise Jehovah, O my soul.
While I live I will praise Jehovah. I will sing praises to my God while I have any being.
Put not your trust in rulers, nor in the son of man, in whom there is no help.
His breath goes forth, he returns to his earth. In that very day his thoughts perish.
Happy is he who has the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in Jehovah his God,
who made heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in them, who keeps truth forever,
who executes justice for the oppressed, who gives food to the hungry. Jehovah releases the prisoners.
Jehovah opens the eyes of the blind. Jehovah raises up those who are bowed down. Jehovah loves the righteous.
Jehovah preserves the sojourners. He upholds the fatherless and widow. But the way of the wicked he turns upside down.
Jehovah will reign forever, thy God, O Zion, to all generations. Praise ye Jehovah.

Praise ye Jehovah, for it is good to sing praises to our God. For it is pleasant, and praise is comely.
Jehovah builds up Jerusalem. He gathers together the outcasts of Israel.
He heals the broken in heart, and binds up their wounds.
He counts the number of the stars. He calls them all by names.
Great is our Lord, and mighty in power. His understanding is infinite.
Jehovah upholds the meek. He brings the wicked down to the ground.
Sing to Jehovah with thanksgiving. Sing praises upon the harp to our God,
who covers the heavens with clouds, who prepares rain for the earth, who makes grass to grow upon the mountains.
He gives to the beast his food, and to the young ravens which cry.
He does not delight in the strength of the horse. He takes no pleasure in the legs of a man.
Jehovah takes pleasure in those who fear him, in those who hope in his loving kindness.
Praise Jehovah, O Jerusalem. Praise thy God, O Zion.
For he has strengthened the bars of thy gates. He has blessed thy sons within thee.
He makes peace in thy borders. He fills thee with the finest of the wheat.
He sends out his commandment upon earth. His word runs very swiftly.
He gives snow like wool. He scatters the hoar-frost like ashes.
He casts forth his ice like morsels. Who can stand before his cold?
He sends out his word, and melts them. He causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow.
He shows his word to Jacob, his statutes and his ordinances to Israel.
He has not dealt so with any nation. And as for his ordinances, they have not known them. Praise ye Jehovah.

Praise ye Jehovah. Praise ye Jehovah from the heavens. Praise him in the heights.
Praise ye him, all his agents. Praise ye him, all his host.
Praise ye him, sun and moon. Praise him, all ye stars of light.
Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that are above the heavens.
Let them praise the name of Jehovah. For he commanded, and they were created.
He has also established them forever and ever. He has made a decree which shall not pass away.
Praise Jehovah from the earth, ye sea-monsters, and all deeps,
fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind, fulfilling his word,
mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all cedars,
beasts and all cattle, creeping things and flying birds,
kings of the earth and all peoples, rulers and all judges of the earth,
both young men and virgins, old men and sons.
Let them praise the name of Jehovah, for his name alone is exalted. His glory is above the earth and the heavens.
And he has lifted up the horn of his people, the praise of all his sanctified, even of the sons of Israel, a people near to him. Praise ye Jehovah.

Praise ye Jehovah. Sing to Jehovah a new song, and his praise in the assembly of the sanctified.
Let Israel rejoice in him who made him. Let the sons of Zion be joyful in their King.
Let them praise his name in the dance. Let them sing praises to him with timbrel and harp.
For Jehovah takes pleasure in his people. He will beautify the meek with salvation.
Let the sanctified exult in glory. Let them sing for joy upon their beds.
The high praises of God are in their mouth, and a two-edged sword in their hand
to execute vengeance upon the nations, and punishments upon the peoples,
to bind their kings with chains, and their ranking men with fetters of iron,
to execute upon them the judgment written. All his sanctified have this honor. Praise ye Jehovah.

Praise ye Jehovah. Praise God in his sanctuary. Praise him in the firmament of his power.
Praise him for his mighty acts. Praise him according to his excellent greatness.
Praise him with trumpet sound. Praise him with psaltery and harp.
Praise him with timbrel and dance. Praise him with stringed instruments and pipe.
Praise him with loud cymbals. Praise him with high sounding cymbals.
Let everything that has breath praise Jehovah. Praise ye Jehovah.

Proverbs

The proverbs of Solomon the son of David, king of Israel,
to know wisdom and instruction, to discern the words of understanding,
to receive instruction in wise dealing, in righteousness and justice and equity,
to give prudence to the simple, to the young man knowledge and discretion,
that the wise man may hear, and increase in learning, and that the man of understanding may attain to sound counsels,
to understand a proverb, and a figure, the words of the wise, and their dark sayings.
The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of knowledge. The foolish despise wisdom and instruction.
My son, hear the instruction of thy father, and forsake not the law of thy mother.
For they shall be a garland of grace to thy head, and chains about thy neck.
My son, if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
If they say, Come with us. Let us lay wait for blood. Let us lurk secretly for the innocent without cause.
Let us swallow them up alive as Sheol, and whole, as those who go down into the pit.
We shall find all precious substance. We shall fill our houses with spoil.
Thou shall cast thy lot among us. We will all have one bag.
My son, walk not thou in the way with them. Restrain thy foot from their path.
For their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed blood.
For in vain is the net spread in the sight of any bird,
and these lay wait for their own blood. They lurk secretly for their own lives.
So are the ways of everyone who is greedy of gain. It takes away the life of the owners of it.
Wisdom cries aloud in the street. She utters her voice in the broad places.
How long, ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity? And scoffers delight them in scoffing, and fools hate knowledge?
Turn back at my reproof. Behold, I will pour out my spirit upon you. I will make my words known to you.
Because I have called, and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no man has regarded,
but ye have made all my counsel void, and want none of my reproof,
I also will laugh at your calamity. I will mock when your fear comes,
when your fear comes as a storm, and your calamity comes on as a whirlwind, when distress and anguish come upon you.
Then they will call upon me, but I will not answer. They will seek me diligently, but they shall not find me,
because they hated knowledge, and did not choose the fear of Jehovah.
They wanted none of my counsel. They despised all my reproof.
Therefore they shall eat of the fruit of their own way, and be filled with their own devices.
For the backsliding of the simple shall kill them, and the careless ease of fools shall destroy them.
But he who hearkens to me shall dwell securely, and shall be quiet without fear of evil.

My son, if thou will receive my words, and lay up my commandments with thee,
so as to incline thine ear to wisdom, and apply thy heart to understanding,
yea, if thou cry after discernment, and lift up thy voice for understanding,
if thou seek her as silver, and search for her as for hidden treasures,
then thou shall understand the fear of Jehovah, and find the knowledge of God.
For Jehovah gives wisdom. Out of his mouth is knowledge and understanding.
He lays up sound wisdom for the upright, a shield to those who walk in integrity,
that he may guard the paths of justice, and preserve the way of his sanctified.
Then thou shall understand righteousness and justice and equity, yea, every good path.
For wisdom shall enter into thy heart, and knowledge shall be pleasant to thy soul,
discretion shall watch over thee, understanding shall keep thee,
to deliver thee from the way of evil, from the men who speak perverse things,
who forsake the paths of uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness,
who rejoice to do evil, and delight in the perverseness of evil,
who are crooked in their ways, and wayward in their paths,
to deliver thee from the interloping woman, even from the stranger who flatters with her words,
who forsakes the companion of her youth, and forgets the covenant of her God
(for her house inclines to death, and her paths to the dead;
none who go to her return again, nor do they attain to the paths of life),
that thou may walk in the way of good men, and keep the paths of the righteous.
For the upright shall dwell in the land, and the perfect shall remain in it.
But the wicked shall be cut off from the land, and the treacherous shall be rooted out of it.

My son, do not forget my law, but let thy heart keep my commandments.
For length of days, and years of life, and peace, they will add to thee.
Let not kindness and truth forsake thee. Bind them about thy neck, write them upon the tablet of thy heart,
so thou shall find favor and good understanding in the sight of God and man.
Trust in Jehovah with all thy heart, and lean not upon thine own understanding.
In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he will direct thy paths.
Be not wise in thine own eyes. Fear Jehovah, and depart from evil.
It will be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones.
Honor Jehovah with thy substance, and with the first-fruits of all thine increase,
so thy barns shall be filled with plenty, and thy vats shall overflow with new wine.
My son, despise not the chastening of Jehovah, nor be weary of his reproof.
For whom Jehovah loves he reproves, and he whips every son whom he receives.
Happy is the man who finds wisdom, and the man who gets understanding.
For the gain of it is better than the gain of silver, and the profit of it than fine gold.
She is more precious than rubies, and none of the things thou can desire are to be compared to her.
Length of days is in her right hand, in her left hand are riches and honor.
Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.
She is a tree of life to those who lay hold upon her. And happy is everyone who retains her.
Jehovah by wisdom founded the earth. By understanding he established the heavens.
By his knowledge the depths were broken up, and the skies drop down the dew.
My son, let them not depart from thine eyes. Keep sound wisdom and discretion,
so they shall be life to thy soul, and grace to thy neck.
Then thou shall walk in thy way securely, and thy foot shall not stumble.
When thou lie down, thou shall not be afraid. Yea, thou shall lie down, and thy sleep shall be sweet.
Be not afraid of sudden fear, nor of the desolation of the wicked, when it comes.
For Jehovah will be thy confidence, and will keep thy foot from being taken.
Do not withhold good from those to whom it is due, when it is in the power of thy hand to do it.
Do not say to thy neighbor, Go, and come again, and tomorrow I will give, when thou have it by thee.
Do not devise evil against thy neighbor, since he dwells securely by thee.
Do not strive with a man without cause, if he has done thee no harm.
Do not envy thou the man of violence, and choose none of his ways.
For the perverse man is an abomination to Jehovah, but his friendship is with the upright.
The curse of Jehovah is in the house of a wicked man, but he blesses the habitation of the righteous.
Surely the Lord is opposed to the arrogant, but he gives grace to the lowly.
The wise shall inherit glory, but shame shall be the promotion of fools.

Hear, ye sons, the instruction of a father, and attend to know understanding.
For I give you good doctrine. Forsake ye not my law.
For I was a son to my father, tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother.
And he taught me, and said to me, Let thy heart retain my words. Keep my commandments, and live.
Get wisdom, get understanding. Do not forget, nor decline from the words of my mouth.
Do not forsake her, and she will preserve thee. Love her, and she will keep thee.
Wisdom is the principal thing. Get wisdom, yea, with all thy getting get understanding.
Exalt her, and she will promote thee. She will bring thee to honor when thou embrace her.
She will give to thy head a garland of grace, a crown of beauty she will deliver to thee.
Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings, and the years of thy life shall be many.
I have taught thee in the way of wisdom. I have led thee in paths of uprightness.
When thou go, thy steps shall not be restricted. And if thou run, thou shall not stumble.
Take firm hold of instruction. Do not let her go. Keep her, for she is thy life.
Enter not into the path of the wicked, and walk not in the way of evil men.
Avoid it. Do not pass by it. Turn from it, and pass on.
For they do not sleep unless they do evil. And their sleep is taken away unless they cause to fall.
For they eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of violence.
But the path of the righteous is as the dawning light, that shines more and more to the perfect day.
The way of the wicked is as darkness. They know not at what they stumble.
My son, attend to my words. Incline thine ear to my sayings.
Let them not depart from thine eyes. Keep them in the midst of thy heart.
For they are life to those who find them, and health to all their flesh.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life.
Put away from thee a wayward mouth, and put perverse lips far from thee.
Let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee.
Make the path of thy feet level, and let all thy ways be established.
Turn not to the right hand nor to the left. Remove thy foot from evil.

My son, attend to my wisdom. Incline thine ear to my understanding,
that thou may preserve discretion, and that thy lips may keep knowledge.
For the lips of an interloping woman drop honey, and her mouth is smoother than oil.
But in the end she is bitter as wormwood, sharp as a two-edged sword.
Her feet go down to death. Her steps take hold on Sheol,
so that she does not find the level path of life. Her ways are unstable, and she does not know.
Now therefore, ye sons, hearken to me, and do not depart from the words of my mouth.
Remove thy way far from her, and do not come near the door of her house,
lest thou give thine honor to others, and thy years to the cruel,
lest strangers be filled with thy strength, and thy labors be in the house of an alien,
and thou mourn at thy latter end when thy flesh and thy body are consumed,
and say, How I have hated instruction, and my heart despised reproof.
Neither have I obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor inclined my ear to those who instructed me!
I was almost in all evil in the midst of the assembly and congregation.
Drink waters out of thine own cistern, and running waters out of thine own well.
Should thy springs be dispersed abroad, and streams of water in the streets?
Let them be for thyself alone, and not for strangers with thee.
a loving hind and a pleasant doe. Let her breasts satisfy thee at all times, and be thou ravished always with her love.
For why should thou, my son, be ravished with an interloping woman, and embrace the bosom of a stranger?
For the ways of man are before the eyes of Jehovah, and he makes level all his paths.
His own iniquities shall take a wicked man, and he shall be held with the cords of his sin.
He shall die for lack of instruction. And in the greatness of his folly he shall go astray.

My son, if thou have become surety for thy neighbor, if thou have struck thy hands for a stranger,
thou are snared with the words of thy mouth, thou are taken with the words of thy mouth.
Do this now, my son, and deliver thyself, since thou have come into the hand of thy neighbor. Go, humble thyself, and importune thy neighbor.
Do not give sleep to thine eyes, nor slumber to thine eyelids.
Deliver thyself as a roe from the hand, and as a bird from the hand of the fowler.
Go to the ant, thou sluggard. Consider her ways, and be wise.
Which, having no chief, overseer, or ruler,
provides her bread in the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest.
How long will thou sleep, O sluggard? When will thou arise out of thy sleep?
A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep,
so thy poverty shall come as a robber, and thy want as an armed man.
A worthless person, a man of iniquity, is he who walks with a perverse mouth,
who winks with his eyes, who speaks with his feet, who makes signs with his fingers,
in whose heart is perverseness, who devises evil continually, who sows discord.
Therefore his calamity shall come suddenly. Suddenly he shall be broken, and that without remedy.
haughty eyes, a lying tongue, and hands that shed innocent blood,
a heart that devises wicked purposes, feet that are swift in running to mischief,
a false witness who utters lies, and he who sows discord among brothers.
My son, keep the commandment of thy father, and do not forsake the law of thy mother.
Bind them continually upon thy heart. Tie them about thy neck.
When thou walk, it shall lead thee. When thou sleep, it shall watch over thee. And when thou awake, it shall talk with thee.
For the commandment is a lamp, and the law is light, and reproofs of instruction are the way of life,
to keep thee from the evil woman, from the flattery of the stranger's tongue.
Do not lust after her beauty in thy heart, nor let her take thee with her eyelids.
For the price of a harlot is as much as a piece of bread, but the adulteress hunts for the precious life.
Can a man take fire in his bosom, and his clothes not be burned?
Or can a man walk upon hot coals, and his feet not be scorched?
So is he who goes in to his neighbor's wife. Whoever touches her shall not be unpunished.
Men do not despise a thief, if he steals to satisfy himself when he is hungry.
Yet if he is found, he shall restore sevenfold. He shall give all the substance of his house.
He who commits adultery with a woman is void of understanding. He who would destroy his own soul does it.
Wounds and dishonor he shall get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away.
For jealousy is a man's fury, and he will not spare in the day of vengeance.
He will not regard any ransom, nor will he be satisfied, though thou give many gifts.

My son, keep my words, and lay up my commandments with thee.
Keep my commandments and live, and my law as the apple of thine eye.
Bind them upon thy fingers. Write them upon the tablet of thy heart.
Say to wisdom, Thou are my sister, and call understanding thy kinswoman,
that they may keep thee from the interloping woman, from the stranger who flatters with her words.
For at the window of my house I looked forth through my lattice,
and I beheld among the simple ones, I discerned among the youths, a young man void of understanding
passing through the street near her corner. And he went the way to her house,
in the twilight, in the evening of the day, in the middle of the night and in the darkness.
And, behold, there met him a woman attired like a harlot, and wily of heart.
She is loud and headstrong. Her feet abide not in her house.
Now she is in the streets, now in the broad places, and lies in wait at every corner.
So she caught him, and kissed him. With an impudent face she said to him,
Sacrifices of peace offerings are with me. I have paid my vows this day.
Therefore I came forth to meet thee, diligently to seek thy face, and I have found thee.
I have spread my couch with carpets of tapestry, with striped cloths of the yarn of Egypt.
I have perfumed my bed With myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon.
Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning. Let us solace ourselves with love.
For the man is not at home. He has gone a long journey.
He has taken a bag of money with him. He will come home at the full moon.
With her much fair speech she causes him to yield. With the flattering of her lips she forces him along.
He goes after her straightaway, as an ox goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the stocks,
till an arrow strikes through his liver, as a bird hastens to the snare. And he does not know that it is for his life.
Now therefore, ye sons, hearken to me, and attend to the words of my mouth.
Let not thy heart decline to her ways. Go not astray in her paths.
For she has cast down many wounded. Yea, all her slain are a mighty host.
Her house is the way to Sheol, going down to the chambers of death.

Does not wisdom cry out, and understanding put forth her voice?
On the top of high places by the way, where the paths meet, she stands.
To you, O men, I call. And my voice is to the sons of men.
O ye simple, understand prudence, and, ye fools, be of an understanding heart.
Hear, for I will speak excellent things. And the opening of my lips shall be right things.
For my mouth shall utter truth. And wickedness is an abomination to my lips.
All the words of my mouth are in righteousness. There is nothing crooked or perverse in them.
They are all plain to him who understands, and right to those who find knowledge.
Receive my instruction, and not silver, and knowledge rather than choice gold.
For wisdom is better than rubies, and all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it.
I, wisdom, have made prudence my dwelling, and find out knowledge and discretion.
The fear of Jehovah is to hate evil. Pride, and arrogance, and the evil way, and the perverse mouth, do I hate.
Counsel is mine, and sound knowledge. I am understanding, I have might.
By me kings reign, and rulers decree justice.
By me rulers rule, and ranking men, even all the judges of the earth.
I love those who love me, and those who seek me diligently shall find me.
Riches and honor are with me, durable wealth and righteousness.
My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold, and my revenue than choice silver.
I walk in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of justice,
that I may cause those who love me to inherit substance, and that I may fill their treasuries.
Jehovah possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his works of old.
I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, before the earth was,
when there were no depths. I was brought forth when there were no fountains abounding with water,
before the mountains were settled, before the hills. I was brought forth
while as yet he had not made the earth, nor the fields, nor the beginning of the dust of the world.
When he established the heavens, I was there. When he set a circle upon the face of the deep,
when he made firm the skies above, when the fountains of the deep became strong,
when he gave to the sea its bound that the waters should not transgress his commandment, when he marked out the foundations of the earth,
then I was by him, a master workman. And I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him,
rejoicing in his habitable earth. And my delight was with the sons of men.
Now therefore, ye sons, hearken to me. For blessed are those who keep my ways.
Hear instruction, and be wise, and do not refuse it.
Blessed is the man who hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.
For he who finds me finds life, and shall obtain favor of Jehovah.
But he who sins against me wrongs his own soul. All those who hate me love death.

Wisdom has built her house. She has hewn out her seven pillars.
She has killed her beasts. She has mingled her wine. She has also furnished her table.
He who is simple, let him turn in here. As for him who is void of understanding, she says to him,
Come, eat ye of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled.
Forsake ye simpleness, and live, and walk in the way of understanding.
He who corrects a scoffer gets himself reviling. And he who reproves a wicked man gets himself a bruise.
Reprove not a scoffer, lest he hate thee. Reprove a wise man, and he will love thee.
Give opportunity to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser. Teach a righteous man, and he will increase in learning.
The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom, and the knowledge of the Holy is understanding.
For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the years of thy life shall be increased.
If thou are wise, thou are wise for thyself. And if thou scoff, thou alone shall bear it.
The foolish woman is clamorous, simple, and knows nothing.
And she sits at the door of her house, on a seat in the high places of the city,
He who is simple, let him turn in here. And as for him who is void of understanding, she says to him,
Stolen waters are sweet, and bread in secret is pleasant.
But he knows not that the dead are there, that her guests are in the depths of Sheol.

The proverbs of Solomon. A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish son is the heaviness of his mother.
Treasures of wickedness profit nothing, but righteousness delivers from death.
Jehovah will not allow the soul of a righteous man to famish, but he thrusts away the desire of the wicked.
He who works with a slack hand becomes poor, but the hand of the diligent makes rich.
He who gathers in summer is a wise son. He who sleeps in harvest is a son who causes shame.
Blessings are upon the head of a righteous man, but violence covers the mouth of the wicked.
The memory of a righteous man is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rot.
The wise in heart will receive commandments, but a prating fool shall fall.
He who walks uprightly walks securely, but he who perverts his ways shall be known.
He who winks with the eye causes sorrow. And a prating fool shall fall.
The mouth of a righteous man is a fountain of life, but violence covers the mouth of the wicked.
Hatred stirs up strife, but love covers all transgressions.
In the lips of him who has discernment wisdom is found, but a rod is for the back of him who is void of understanding.
Wise men lay up knowledge, but the mouth of a foolish man is a present destruction.
The rich man's wealth is his strong city. The destruction of the poor is their poverty.
The labor of a righteous man produces life. The fruit of a wicked man is to sin.
He is in the way of life who heeds correction, but he who forsakes reproof errs.
He who hides hatred is of lying lips. And he who utters a slander is a fool.
Transgression is not lacking in the multitude of words, but he who refrains his lips does wisely.
The tongue of a righteous man is choice silver. The heart of the wicked is little worth.
The lips of a righteous man feeds many, but the foolish die for lack of understanding.
The blessing of Jehovah, it makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it.
It is as sport to a fool to do mischief, and so is wisdom to a man of understanding.
The fear of a wicked man shall come upon him. And the desire of the righteous shall be granted.
When the whirlwind passes, the wicked man is no more, but the righteous man is an everlasting foundation.
As vinegar to the teeth, and as smoke to the eyes, so is the sluggard to those who send him.
The fear of Jehovah prolongs days, but the years of the wicked shall be shortened.
The hope of the righteous is gladness, but the expectation of the wicked shall perish.
The way of Jehovah is a stronghold to the upright, but it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.
A righteous man shall never be removed, but the wicked shall not dwell in the land.
The mouth of a righteous man brings forth wisdom, but the perverse tongue shall be cut off.
The lips of a righteous man knows what is acceptable, but the mouth of the wicked is perverseness.

A false balance is an abomination to Jehovah, but a just weight is his delight.
When pride comes, then comes shame, but with the lowly is wisdom.
The integrity of the upright shall guide them, but the perverseness of the treacherous shall destroy them.
Riches do not profit in the day of wrath, but righteousness delivers from death.
The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way, but the wicked man shall fall by his own wickedness.
The righteousness of the upright shall deliver them, but the treacherous shall be taken in their own iniquity.
When a wicked man dies, his expectation shall perish, and the hope of iniquity perishes.
A righteous man is delivered out of trouble, and a wicked man comes in his stead.
The hypocrite destroys his neighbor with his mouth, but the righteous shall be delivered through knowledge.
When it goes well with the righteous, the city rejoices. And when the wicked perish, there is shouting.
By the blessing of the upright the city is exalted, but it is overthrown by the mouth of the wicked.
He who despises his neighbor is void of wisdom, but a man of understanding holds his peace.
He who goes around as a tale-bearer reveals secrets, but he who is of a faithful spirit conceals a matter.
Where no wise guidance is, the people fall, but in the multitude of counselors there is safety.
He who is surety for a stranger shall smart for it, but he who hates suretyship is secure.
A gracious woman obtains honor, and aggressive men obtain riches.
The merciful man does good to his own soul, but he who is cruel troubles his own flesh.
A wicked man earns deceitful wages, but he who sows righteousness has a sure reward.
He who is steadfast in righteousness comes to life, and he who pursues evil comes to his own death.
Those who are perverse in heart are an abomination to Jehovah, but such as are perfect in their way are his delight.
Hand in hand, the evil man shall not be unpunished, but the seed of the righteous shall be delivered.
A ring of gold in a swine's snout, is a beautiful woman who is without discretion.
The desire of the righteous is only good. The expectation of the wicked is wrath.
There is he who scatters, and increases yet more, and there he is who withholds more than is proper, but only to want.
The generous soul shall be made prosperous, and he who waters shall also be watered himself.
The people shall curse him who withholds grain, but a blessing shall be upon the head of him who sells it.
He who diligently seeks good seeks favor, but he who searches after evil, it shall come to him.
He who trusts in his riches shall fall, but the righteous shall flourish as the green leaf.
He who troubles his own house shall inherit the wind. And a foolish man shall be servant to a wise man of heart.
The fruit of a righteous man is a tree of life, and he who is wise wins souls.
Behold, a righteous man shall be recompensed in the earth, how much more the wicked man and the sinner!

He who loves correction loves knowledge, but he who hates reproof is brutish.
A good man shall obtain favor of Jehovah, but he will condemn a man of wicked devices.
A man shall not be established by wickedness, but the root of the righteous shall not be moved.
A worthy woman is the crown of her husband, but she who makes ashamed is as rottenness in his bones.
The thoughts of the righteous are just. The counsels of the wicked are deceit.
The words of the wicked lie in wait for blood, but the mouth of the upright shall deliver them.
The wicked are overthrown, and are not, but the house of the righteous shall stand.
A man shall be commended according to his wisdom, but he who is of a perverse heart shall be despised.
Better is he who is lightly esteemed, and has a servant, than he who honors himself, and lacks bread.
A righteous man regards the life of his beast, but the tender mercies of the wicked are cruel.
He who tills his land shall have plenty of bread, but he who pursues vanities is void of understanding.
A wicked man desires the net of evil men, but the root of the righteous gives.
A wicked man is snared by the transgression of his lips, but the righteous shall come out of trouble.
A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth, and the actions of a man's hands shall be rendered to him.
The way of a fool is right in his own eyes, but he who is wise hearkens to counsel.
A fool's vexation is instantly known, but a prudent man conceals shame.
He who utters truth shows forth righteousness, but a false witness, deceit.
There is he who speaks rashly like the piercings of a sword, but the tongue of the wise is health.
The lips of truth shall be established forever, but a lying tongue is but for a moment.
Deceit is in the heart of those who devise evil, but joy is to the counselors of peace.
There shall no mischief happen to a righteous man, but the wicked shall be filled with evil.
Lying lips are an abomination to Jehovah, but those who deal truly are his delight.
A prudent man conceals knowledge, but the heart of fools proclaims foolishness.
The hand of the diligent shall bear rule, but the slothful shall be put under task work.
Heaviness in the heart of a man makes it droop, but a good word makes it glad.
A righteous man is a guide to his neighbor, but the way of the wicked causes them to err.
The slothful man roasts not that which he took in hunting, but the substance of a diligent man is precious.
Life is in the way of righteousness, and in the pathway thereof there is no death.

A wise son hears his father's instruction, but a scoffer listens not to rebuke.
A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth, but the soul of the treacherous, violence.
He who guards his mouth keeps his life. He who opens wide his lips shall have destruction.
The soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing, but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat.
A righteous man hates lying, but a wicked man is loathsome, and comes to shame.
Righteousness guards him who is upright in the way, but wickedness overthrows the sinner.
There is he who makes himself rich, yet has nothing, and he who makes himself poor, yet has great wealth.
The ransom of a man's life is his riches, but the poor hears no threatening.
The light of the righteous rejoices, but the lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
Through pride a vain man causes contention, but wisdom is with the well-advised.
Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished, but he who gathers by labor shall have increase.
Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but when the desire comes, it is a tree of life.
He who despises the word brings destruction on himself, but he who fears the commandment shall be rewarded.
The law of a wise man is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.
Good understanding gives favor, but the way of the transgressor is hard.
Every prudent man works with knowledge, but a fool flaunts folly.
A wicked messenger falls into evil, but a faithful ambassador is health.
Poverty and shame are to him who refuses correction, but he who regards reproof shall be honored.
The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul, but it is an abomination to fools to depart from evil.
Walk with wise men, and thou shall be wise. But the companion of fools shall smart for it.
Evil pursues sinners, but the righteous shall be recompensed with good.
A good man leaves an inheritance to his son's sons, and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the righteous.
Much food is in the tillage of the poor, but there is that is consumed because of injustice.
He who spares his rod hates his son, but he who loves him chastens him promptly.
A righteous man eats to the satisfying of his soul, but the belly of the wicked shall want.

Every wise woman builds her house, but a foolish woman plucks it down with her own hands.
He who walks in his uprightness fears Jehovah, but he who is perverse in his ways despises him.
In the mouth of a fool is a rod of pride, but the lips of the wise shall preserve them.
Where no oxen are, the crib is clean, but by the strength of the ox is much increase.
A faithful witness will not lie, but a false witness utters lies.
A scoffer seeks wisdom, and finds it not, but knowledge is easy to him who has understanding.
Go into the presence of a foolish man, and thou shall not perceive the lips of knowledge.
The wisdom of a prudent man is to understand his way, but the folly of fools is deceit.
Fools mock at sin, but among the upright there is good will.
The heart knows its own bitterness, and a stranger does not intermeddle with its joy.
The house of the wicked shall be overthrown, but the tent of the upright shall flourish.
There is a way which seems right to a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.
Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of mirth is heaviness.
The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways, and a good man from his own fruits.
A simple man believes every word, but the prudent man looks well to his going.
A wise man fears, and departs from evil, but the fool bears himself insolently, and is confident.
He who is soon angry will deal foolishly. And a man of wicked devices is hated.
The simple inherit folly, but the prudent are crowned with knowledge.
The evil bow down before the good, and the wicked at the gates of the righteous.
The poor man is regarded inferior even by his own neighbor, but the rich man has many friends.
He who despises his neighbor sins, but he who has pity on the poor, happy is he.
Do they not err who devise evil? But mercy and truth are to those who devise good.
In all labor there is profit, but the talk of the lips tends only to poverty.
The crown of the wise is their riches. The foolishness of fools is folly.
A true witness delivers souls, but he who utters lies causes deceit.
In the fear of Jehovah is strong confidence, and his sons shall have a place of refuge.
The fear of Jehovah is a fountain of life, to depart from the snares of death.
In the multitude of people is the king's glory, but in the want of people is the destruction of the prince.
He who is slow to anger is of great understanding, but he who is hasty of spirit exalts folly.
A tranquil heart is the life of the flesh, but envy is the rottenness of the bones.
He who oppresses a poor man reproaches his maker, but he who has mercy on a needy man honors him.
An evil man is thrust down in his evil-doing, but a righteous man has hope in his death.
Wisdom rests in the heart of him who has understanding, but what is in the inward part of fools is made known.
Righteousness exalts a nation, but sin is a reproach to any people.
The king's favor is toward a servant who deals wisely, but his wrath will be to him who causes shame.

A soft answer turns away wrath, but a grievous word stirs up anger.
The tongue of the wise utters knowledge rightly, but the mouth of fools pours out folly.
The eyes of Jehovah are in every place, keeping watch upon the evil and the good.
A gentle tongue is a tree of life, but perverseness in it is a breaking of the spirit.
A fool despises his father's correction, but he who regards reproof gets prudence.
In the house of a righteous man is much treasure, but in the revenues of a wicked man is trouble.
The lips of the wise disperse knowledge, but the heart of the foolish, not so.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to Jehovah, but the prayer of the upright is his delight.
The way of a wicked man is an abomination to Jehovah, but he loves him who follows after righteousness.
There is grievous correction for him who forsakes the way. He who hates reproof shall die.
Sheol and Abaddon are before Jehovah. How much more then the hearts of the sons of men!
A scoffer does not like to be reproved. He will not go to the wise.
A glad heart makes a cheerful countenance, but by sorrow of heart the spirit is broken.
The heart of him who has understanding seeks knowledge, but the mouth of fools feeds on folly.
All the days of the afflicted are evil, but he who is of a cheerful heart has a continual feast.
Better is little with the fear of Jehovah, than great treasure and trouble with it.
Better is a dinner of herbs where love is, than a fatted ox and hatred with it.
A wrathful man stirs up contention, but he who is slow to anger appeases strife.
The way of the sluggard is as a hedge of thorns, but the path of the upright is made a highway.
A wise son makes a glad father, but a foolish man despises his mother.
Folly is joy to him who is void of wisdom, but a man of understanding makes his going straight.
Where there is no counsel, plans are disappointed, but in the multitude of counselors they are established.
A man has joy in the answer of his mouth, and a word in due season, how good it is!
To the wise man the way of life is upward, that he may depart from Sheol beneath.
Jehovah will root up the house of the proud, but he will establish the border of the widow.
Evil devices are an abomination to Jehovah, but pleasant words are pure.
He who is greedy of gain troubles his own house, but he who hates bribes shall live.
The heart of a righteous man meditates to answer, but the mouth of the wicked pours out evil things.
Jehovah is far from the wicked, but he hears the prayer of the righteous.
The light of the eyes rejoices the heart. Good news make the bones fat.
The ear that hearkens to the reproof of life shall abide among the wise.
He who refuses correction despises his own soul, but he who hearkens to reproof gets understanding.
The fear of Jehovah is the instruction of wisdom, and before honor is humility.

The plans of the heart belong to man, but the answer of the tongue is from Jehovah.
All the ways of a man are clean in his own eyes, but Jehovah weighs the spirits.
Commit thy works to Jehovah, and thy purposes shall be established.
Jehovah has made everything for its own end, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil.
Everyone who is proud in heart is an abomination to Jehovah. Hand in hand, he shall not be unpunished.
By mercy and truth iniquity is atoned for, and by the fear of Jehovah men depart from evil.
When a man's ways please Jehovah, he makes even his enemies to be at peace with him.
Better is a little, with righteousness, than great revenues with injustice.
A man's heart devises his way, but Jehovah directs his steps.
A divine sentence is in the lips of the king. His mouth shall not transgress in judgment.
A just balance and scales are Jehovah's. All the weights of the bag are his work.
It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness, for the throne is established by righteousness.
Righteous lips are the delight of kings, and they love him who speaks right.
The wrath of a king is messengers of death, but a wise man will pacify it.
In the light of the king's countenance is life, and his favor is as a cloud of the latter rain.
How much better it is to get wisdom than gold! Yea, to get understanding is rather to be chosen than silver.
The highway of the upright is to depart from evil. He who keeps his way preserves his soul.
Pride is before destruction, and a haughty spirit before a fall.
Better it is to be of a lowly spirit with the poor, than to divide the spoil with the proud.
He who gives heed to the word shall find good, and whoever trusts in Jehovah, happy is he.
The wise in heart shall be called prudent, and the sweetness of the lips increases learning.
Understanding is a well-spring of life to him who has it, but the correction of fools is folly.
The heart of the wise instructs his mouth, and adds learning to his lips.
Sweet to the soul, and health to the bones.
There is a way which seems right to a man, but the end thereof are the ways of death.
The appetite of the laboring man labors for him, for his mouth urges him.
A worthless man devises mischief, and in his lips there is as a scorching fire.
A perverse man scatters abroad strife, and a whisperer separates chief friends.
A man of violence entices his neighbor, and leads him in a way that is not good.
He who shuts his eyes devises perverse things. He who moves his lips brings evil to pass.
The hoary head is a crown of glory. It shall be found in the way of righteousness.
He who is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he who rules his spirit, than he who takes a city.
The lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposing thereof is of Jehovah.

Better is a dry morsel, and quietness with it, than a house full of feasting with strife.
A servant who deals wisely shall have rule over a son who causes shame, and shall have part in the inheritance among the brothers.
The refining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold, but Jehovah tries the hearts.
An evildoer gives heed to wicked lips. A liar gives ear to a mischievous tongue.
He who mocks a poor man reproaches his maker. He who is glad at calamity shall not be unpunished.
Son's sons are the crown of old men, and the glory of sons are their fathers.
Excellent speech is not appropriate to a fool, much less lying lips to a prince.
A bribe is a precious stone in the eyes of him who has it; wherever it turns, it prospers.
He who covers a transgression seeks love, but he who repeats a matter separates chief friends.
A rebuke enters deeper into him who has understanding than a hundred stripes into a fool.
An evil man seeks only rebellion. Therefore a cruel messenger shall be sent against him.
Let a man meet a bear robbed of her cubs, rather than a fool in his folly.
He who rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house.
The beginning of strife is like letting out water. Therefore leave off contention, before there is quarrelling.
He who justifies a wicked man, and he who condemns a righteous man, both of them alike are an abomination to Jehovah.
Why is there a price in the hand of a fool to buy wisdom, since he has no understanding?
A friend loves at all times, and a brother is born for adversity.
A man void of understanding strikes hands, and becomes surety in the presence of his neighbor.
He loves transgression who loves strife. He who raises high his gate seeks destruction.
He who has a wayward heart finds no good, and he who has a perverse tongue falls into mischief.
He who begets a fool it is to his sorrow, and the father of a fool has no joy.
A cheerful heart is a good medicine, but a broken spirit dries up the bones.
A wicked man receives a bribe out of the bosom, to pervert the ways of justice.
Wisdom is before the face of him who has understanding, but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth.
A foolish son is a grief to his father, and bitterness to her who bore him.
Also to punish a righteous man is not good, nor to smite nobles for uprightness.
He who spares his words has knowledge, and he who is of a cool spirit is a man of understanding.
Even a fool, when he holds his peace, is considered wise. When he shuts his lips, he is prudent.

He who desires to separate himself seeks excuses, and rages against all sound wisdom.
A fool has no delight in understanding, but only that his heart may reveal itself.
When a wicked man comes, contempt also comes, and with disgrace, reproach.
The words of a man's mouth are deep waters. The wellspring of wisdom is a flowing brook.
To respect the person of a wicked man is not good, nor to turn aside a righteous man in judgment.
A fool's lips enter into contention, and his mouth calls for stripes.
A fool's mouth is his destruction, and his lips are the snare of his soul.
The words of a whisperer are as dainty morsels, and they go down into the innermost parts.
He also that is slack in his work is brother to him that is a destroyer.
The name of Jehovah is a strong tower. A righteous man runs into it, and is safe.
The rich man's wealth is his strong city, and as a high wall in his own imagination.
Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, and before honor is humility.
He who gives answer before he hears, it is folly and shame to him.
The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity, but a broken spirit who can bear?
The heart of a prudent man gets knowledge, and the ear of the wise seeks knowledge.
A man's gift makes room for him, and brings him before great men.
He who pleads his case first seems just, but his neighbor comes and searches him out.
The lot causes contentions to cease, and decides between the mighty.
A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city, and such contentions are like the bars of a castle.
A man's belly shall be filled with the fruit of his mouth. With the increase of his lips he shall be satisfied.
Death and life are in the power of the tongue, and those who love it shall eat the fruit of it.
He who finds a wife finds a good thing, and obtains favor from Jehovah.
A poor man uses entreaties, but a rich man answers roughly.
He who makes many friends does it to his own destruction, but there is a friend who sticks closer than a brother.

Better is a poor man who walks in his integrity than he who is perverse in his lips and is a fool.
Also, that the soul be without knowledge is not good. And he who hastens with his feet sins.
The foolishness of a man subverts his way, and his heart rages against Jehovah.
Wealth adds many friends, but a poor man is separated from his friend.
A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he who utters lies shall not escape.
Many will entreat the favor of a generous man, and every man is a friend to him who gives gifts.
All the brothers of a poor man regard him inferior, how much more do his friends go far from him! He pursues with words, but they are gone.
He who gets wisdom loves his own soul. He who keeps understanding shall find good.
A false witness shall not be unpunished, and he who utters lies shall perish.
Luxurious living is not fitting for a fool, much less for a servant to have rule over rulers.
The discretion of a man makes him slow to anger, and it is his glory to pass over a transgression.
The king's wrath is as the roaring of a lion, but his favor is as dew upon the grass.
A foolish son is the calamity of his father, and the contentions of a wife are a continual dropping.
House and riches are an inheritance from fathers, but a prudent wife is from Jehovah.
Slothfulness casts into a deep sleep, and the idle soul shall suffer hunger.
He who keeps the commandment keeps his soul. He who is careless of his ways shall die.
He who has pity upon a poor man lends to Jehovah, and he will repay him his good deed.
Chasten thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare for his crying.
A man of great wrath shall bear the penalty, for if thou deliver him, thou must do it yet again.
Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be wise in thy latter end.
There are many devices in a man's heart, but the counsel of Jehovah, that shall stand.
That which makes a man to be desired is his kindness, and a poor man is better than a liar.
The fear of Jehovah is life to a man, and he shall abide satisfied. He shall not be visited with evil.
The sluggard buries his hand in the dish, and will not so much as bring it to his mouth again.
Smite a scoffer, and a simple man will learn prudence. And reprove him who has understanding, and he will understand knowledge.
He who does violence to his father, and chases away his mother, is a son that causes shame and brings reproach.
To err from the words of knowledge, cease, my son, to hear instruction.
A worthless witness mocks at justice, and the mouth of the wicked swallows iniquity.
Judgments are prepared for scoffers, and stripes for the back of fools.

Wine is a mocker, strong drink a brawler, and whoever errs thereby is not wise.
The terror of a king is as the roaring of a lion. He who provokes him to anger sins against his own life.
It is an honor for a man to keep aloof from strife, but every fool will be quarrelling.
The sluggard will not plow because of the winter. Therefore he shall beg in harvest, and have nothing.
Purpose in the heart of man is deep water, but a man of understanding will draw it out.
Most men will proclaim every one his own goodness, but a faithful man who can find?
A righteous man who walks in his integrity, blessed are his sons after him.
A king who sits on the throne of judgment scatters away all evil with his eyes.
Who can say, I have made my heart clean. I am pure from my sin?
Diverse weights, and diverse measures, both of them alike are an abomination to Jehovah.
Even a child makes himself known by his doings, whether his work be pure, and whether it be right.
The hearing ear, and the seeing eye, Jehovah has made even both of them.
Love not sleep, lest thou come to poverty. Open thine eyes, and thou shall be satisfied with bread.
It is bad, it is bad, says the buyer, but when he is gone his way, then he boasts.
There is gold, and abundance of rubies, but the lips of knowledge are a precious jewel.
Take his garment who is surety for a stranger, and hold him in pledge for foreigners.
Bread of falsehood is sweet to a man, but afterwards his mouth shall be filled with gravel.
Every purpose is established by counsel, and by wise guidance make thou war.
He who goes about as a tale-bearer reveals secrets. Therefore do not associate with him who opens wide his lips.
He who curses his father or his mother, his lamp shall be put out in blackness of darkness.
An inheritance gotten hastily at the beginning shall not be blessed in the end.
Say thou not, I will recompense evil. Wait for Jehovah, and he will save thee.
Diverse weights are an abomination to Jehovah, and a false balance is not good.
A man's goings are of Jehovah, how then can man understand his way?
It is a snare to a man to say rashly, It is holy. And to make inquiry after vows.
A wise king winnows the wicked, and brings the wheel over them.
The spirit of man is the lamp of Jehovah, searching all his innermost parts.
Kindness and truth preserve the king, and his throne is upheld by kindness.
The glory of young men is their strength, and the beauty of old men is the hoary head.
Stripes that wound cleanse away evil, and strokes, the innermost parts.

The king's heart is in the hand of Jehovah as streams of water. He turns it wherever he will.
Every way of a man is right in his own eyes, but Jehovah weighs the hearts.
To do righteousness and justice is more acceptable to Jehovah than sacrifice.
A high look, and a proud heart, even the lamp of the wicked, is sin.
The thoughts of a diligent man lead only to abundance, but everyone who is hasty, only to want.
The getting of treasures by a lying tongue is a vapor driven to and fro by those who seek death.
The violence of the wicked shall sweep them away, because they refuse to do justice.
The way of him who is laden with guilt is exceedingly crooked, but as for a pure man, his work is right.
It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a contentious woman in a wide house.
The soul of a wicked man desires evil. His neighbor finds no favor in his eyes.
When a scoffer is punished, a simple man is made wise, and when a wise man is instructed, he receives knowledge.
the wicked are overthrown to ruin.
He who stops his ears at the cry of a poor man, he also shall cry, but shall not be heard.
A gift in secret pacifies anger, and a present in the bosom, strong wrath.
It is joy to the righteous to do justice, but it is a destruction to the workers of iniquity.
The man who wanders out of the way of understanding shall rest in the assembly of the dead.
He who loves pleasure shall be a poor man. He who loves wine and oil shall not be rich.
A wicked man is a ransom for a righteous man, and the treacherous dealer for the upright.
It is better to dwell in a desert land, than with a contentious and fretful woman.
There is precious treasure and oil in the dwelling of a wise man, but a foolish man swallows it up.
He who follows after righteousness and kindness finds life, righteousness, and honor.
A wise man scales the city of the mighty, and brings down the strength of the confidence of it.
He who keeps his mouth and his tongue keeps his soul from troubles.
The proud and haughty man, scoffer is his name. He works in the arrogance of pride.
The desire of the sluggard kills him, for his hands refuse to labor.
There is he who covets greedily all the day long, but the righteous gives and does not withhold.
The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination. How much more when he brings it with a wicked mind!
A false witness shall perish, but the man who hears shall speak so as to endure.
A wicked man hardens his face, but as for an upright man, he establishes his ways.
There is no wisdom nor understanding nor counsel against Jehovah.
The horse is prepared against the day of battle, but victory is from Jehovah.

A good name is rather to be chosen than great riches, loving favor rather than silver and gold.
The rich and the poor meet together. Jehovah is the maker of them all.
A prudent man sees the evil, and hides himself, but the simple pass on, and suffer for it.
The reward of humility and the fear of Jehovah is riches and honor and life.
Thorns and snares are in the way of a perverse man. He who keeps his soul shall be far from them.
Train up a child in the way he should go, and even when he is old he will not depart from it.
The rich rule over the poor, and the borrower is servant to the lender.
He who sows iniquity shall reap calamity, and the rod of his wrath shall fail.
He who has a bountiful eye shall be blessed, for he gives of his bread to the poor.
Cast out the scoffer, and contention will go out, yea, strife and reproach will cease.
He who loves pureness of heart, for the grace of his lips, the king will be his friend.
The eyes of Jehovah preserve knowledge, but he overthrows the words of the treacherous man.
The sluggard says, There is a lion outside. I shall be slain in the streets.
The mouth of interloping women is a deep pit. He who is abhorred of Jehovah shall fall in it.
Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction shall drive it far from him.
He who oppresses a poor man to his increase, and he who gives to a rich man, comes only to want.
Incline thine ear, and hear the words of the wise, and apply thy heart to my knowledge.
For it is a pleasant thing if thou keep them within thee, if they be established together upon thy lips.
That thy trust may be in Jehovah, I have made them known to thee this day, even to thee.
Have I not written to thee excellent things of counsels and knowledge,
to make thee know the certainty of the words of truth, that thou may carry back words of truth to those who send thee?
Do not rob a poor man, because he is poor, nor oppress an afflicted man in the gate.
For Jehovah will plead their cause, and despoil of life those who despoil them.
Make no friendship with a man who is given to anger, and thou shall not go with a wrathful man,
lest thou learn this ways, and get a snare to thy soul.
Be thou not one of those who strike hands, or of those who are sureties for debts.
If thou have not wherewith to pay, why should he take away thy bed from under thee?
Remove not the ancient landmark, which thy fathers have set.
See thou a man diligent in his business? He shall stand before kings; he shall not stand before obscure men.

When thou sit to eat with a ruler, consider diligently him who is before thee,
and put a knife to thy throat if thou be a man given to appetite.
Be not desirous of his dainties, since they are deceitful food.
Weary not thyself to be rich. Out of thine own wisdom, cease.
Will thou set thine eyes upon that which is not? For it certainly makes itself wings, like an eagle that flies toward heaven.
Eat thou not the bread of an evil eye, nor desire thou his dainties.
For as he thinks within himself, so is he. Eat and drink, he says to thee, but his heart is not with thee.
The morsel which thou have eaten thou shall vomit up, and lose thy sweet words.
Speak not in the hearing of a fool, for he will despise the wisdom of thy words.
Remove not the ancient landmark. And enter not into the fields of the fatherless,
for their Redeemer is strong. He will plead their cause against thee.
Apply thy heart to instruction, and thine ears to the words of knowledge.
Withhold not correction from the child, for if thou beat him with the rod, he will not die.
Thou shall beat him with the rod, and shall deliver his soul from Sheol.
My son, if thy heart be wise, my heart will be glad, even mine.
Yea, my heart will rejoice when thy lips speak right things.
Let not thy heart envy sinners, but be thou in the fear of Jehovah all the day long.
For surely there is a reward, and thy hope shall not be cut off.
Hear thou, my son, and be wise, and guide thy heart in the way.
Be not among winebibbers, among gluttonous eaters of flesh.
For the drunkard and the glutton shall come to poverty, and drowsiness will clothe a man with rags.
Hearken to thy father who begot thee, and despise not thy mother when she is old.
Buy the truth, and do not sell it, yea, wisdom, and instruction, and understanding.
The father of a righteous man will greatly rejoice, and he who begets a wise son will have joy of him.
Let thy father and thy mother be glad, and let her who bore thee rejoice.
My son, give me thy heart, and let thine eyes delight in my ways.
For a harlot is a deep ditch, and an interloping woman is a narrow pit.
Yea, she lies in wait as a robber, and increases the treacherous among men.
Who has woe? Who has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who has complaining? Who has wounds without cause? Who has redness of eyes?
Those who tarry long at the wine. Those who go to seek out mixed wine.
Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it sparkles in the cup, when it goes down smoothly.
At the end it bites like a serpent, and stings like an adder.
Thine eyes shall behold strange things, and thy heart shall utter perverse things.
Yea, thou shall be as he who lies down in the midst of the sea, or as he who lies upon the top of a mast.
They have stricken me, thou shall say, and I was not hurt. They have beaten me, and I did not feel it. When shall I awake? I will seek it yet again.

Be not thou envious against evil men, nor desire to be with them.
For their heart meditates oppression, and their lips talk of mischief.
Through wisdom a house is built, and by understanding it is established,
and by knowledge the chambers are filled with all precious and pleasant riches.
A wise man is strong, yea, a man of knowledge increases might.
For by wise guidance thou shall make thy war, and in the multitude of counselors there is safety.
Wisdom is too high for a fool. He opens not his mouth in the gate.
He who devises to do evil, men shall call him a mischief-maker.
The thought of folly is sin. And the scoffer is an abomination to men.
If thou faint in the day of adversity, thy strength is small.
Deliver those who are carried away to death, and hold thou back those who are ready to be slain.
If thou say, Behold, we did not know this, Does not he who weighs the hearts consider it? And he who keeps thy soul, does he not know it? And shall not he render to every man according to his work?
My son, eat thou honey, for it is good, and the droppings of the honeycomb, which are sweet to thy taste,
so the knowledge of wisdom is to thy soul. If thou have found it, then there shall be a reward, and thy hope shall not be cut off.
Lay not in wait, O wicked man, against the habitation of the righteous. Do not destroy his resting place.
For a righteous man falls seven times, and rises up again, but the wicked are overthrown by calamity.
Rejoice not when thine enemy falls, and let not thy heart be glad when he is overthrown,
lest Jehovah see it, and it displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him.
Fret not thyself because of evildoers, nor be thou envious at the wicked.
For there shall be no reward to the evil man. The lamp of the wicked shall be put out.
My son, fear thou Jehovah and the king, and do not associate with those who are given to change.
For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and the destruction from them both, who knows it?
To have respect of persons in judgment is not good.
He who says to a wicked man, Thou are righteous, peoples shall curse him, nations shall abhor him.
But to those who rebuke him shall be delight, and a good blessing shall come upon them.
He who gives a right answer kisses the lips.
Prepare thy work outside, and make it ready for thee in the field, and afterwards build thy house.
Be not a witness against thy neighbor without cause, and deceive not with thy lips.
Say not, I will do so to him as he has done to me; I will render to the man according to his work.
I went by the field of the sluggard, and by the vineyard of the man void of understanding.
And, lo, it was all grown over with thorns. The face of it was covered with nettles, and the stone wall of it was broken down.
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep,
so thy poverty shall come as a robber, and thy want as an armed man.

These also are proverbs of Solomon, which the men of Hezekiah king of Judah copied out.
It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but the glory of kings is to search out a matter.
As the heavens for height, and the earth for depth, so the heart of kings is unsearchable.
Take away the dross from the silver, and there comes forth a vessel for the refiner.
Take away the wicked from before the king, and his throne shall be established in righteousness.
Put not thyself forward in the presence of the king, and stand not in the place of great men.
For it is better that it be said to thee, Come up here, than that thou should be put lower in the presence of the prince, whom thine eyes have seen.
Go not forth hastily to strive. What will thou do in the end of it when thy neighbor has put thee to shame?
Debate thy case with thy neighbor himself, and disclose not the secret of another,
lest he who hears it revile thee, and thine infamy turn not away.
A word fitly spoken is apples of gold in a network of silver.
An earring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, is a wise reprover upon an obedient ear.
As the cold of snow in the time of harvest, is a faithful messenger to those who send him, for he refreshes the soul of his masters.
Clouds and wind without rain, is he who boasts himself of his gifts falsely.
By long-suffering a ruler is persuaded, and a soft tongue breaks the bone.
Have thou found honey? Eat as much as is sufficient for thee, lest thou be filled with it, and vomit it.
Let thy foot be seldom in thy neighbor's house, lest he be weary of thee, and hate thee.
A man who bears false witness against his neighbor is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow.
Confidence in an unfaithful man in time of trouble is a broken tooth, and a foot out of joint.
As he who takes off a garment in cold weather, and vinegar upon soda, so is he who sings songs to a heavy heart.
If thine enemy is hungry, give him bread to eat, and if he is thirsty, give him water to drink.
For thou will heap coals of fire upon his head, and Jehovah will reward thee.
The north wind brings forth rain. So does a backbiting tongue, an angry countenance.
It is better to dwell in the corner of the housetop, than with a contentious woman in a wide house.
As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is good news from a far country.
A troubled fountain, and a corrupted spring, is a righteous man who gives way before the wicked.
It is not good to eat much honey, so for men to search out their own glory is grievous.
He whose spirit is without restraint is a city that is broken down and without walls.

As snow in summer, and as rain in harvest, so honor is not seemly for a fool.
As the sparrow in her wandering, as the swallow in her flying, so the curse that is causeless does not alight.
A whip for the horse, a bridle for the donkey, and a rod for the back of fools.
Answer not a fool according to his folly, lest thou also be like to him.
Answer a fool according to his folly, lest he be wise in his own conceit.
He who sends a message by the hand of a fool cuts off the feet, and drinks injury.
The legs of a lame man hang loose. So is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
As he who binds a stone in a sling, so is he who gives honor to a fool.
As a thorn that goes up into the hand of a drunkard, so is a proverb in the mouth of fools.
As an archer who wounds all, so is he who hires a fool, and he who hires those who pass by.
As a dog who returns to his vomit, is a fool who repeats his folly.
See thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is more hope for a fool than of him.
The sluggard says, There is a lion in the way; a lion is in the streets.
The door turns upon its hinges, so does the sluggard upon his bed.
The sluggard buries his hand in the dish. It wearies him to bring it again to his mouth.
The sluggard is wiser in his own conceit than seven men who can render a reason.
He who passes by, and meddles with strife not his, is like he who takes a dog by the ears.
As a madman who casts firebrands, arrows, and death,
so is the man who deceives his neighbor, and says, Am I not in sport?
For lack of wood the fire goes out, and where there is no whisperer, contention ceases.
As coals are to hot embers, and wood to fire, so is a contentious man to inflame strife.
The words of a whisperer are as dainty morsels, and they go down into the innermost parts.
Fervent lips and a wicked heart are an earthen vessel overlaid with silver dross.
He who hates masquerades with his lips, but he lays up deceit within him.
When he speaks graciously, believe him not, for there are seven abominations in his heart.
Though his hatred cover itself with guile, his wickedness shall be openly shown before the assembly.
He who digs a pit shall fall in it, and he who rolls a stone, it shall return upon him.
A lying tongue hates those whom it has wounded, and a flattering mouth works ruin.

Boast not thyself of tomorrow, for thou know not what a day may bring forth.
Let another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a stranger, and not thine own lips.
A stone is heavy, and the sand weighty, but a fool's vexation is heavier than both.
Wrath is cruel, and anger is overwhelming, but who is able to stand before jealousy?
Better is open rebuke than love that is hidden.
Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are profuse.
The full soul loathes a honeycomb, but to the hungry soul every bitter thing is sweet.
As a bird that wanders from her nest, so is a man who wanders from his place.
Oil and perfume rejoice the heart, so too the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel.
Forsake not thine own friend, and thy father's friend. And go not to thy brother's house in the day of thy calamity. Better is a neighbor nearby than a brother far off.
My son, be wise, and make my heart glad, that I may answer him who reproaches me.
A prudent man sees the evil, and hides himself. The simple pass on, and suffer for it.
Take his garment who is surety for a stranger, and hold him in pledge who is surety for a strange woman.
He who blesses his friend with a loud voice, rising early in the morning, it shall be considered a curse to him.
A continual dropping in a very rainy day, and a contentious woman are alike.
He who would restrain her restrains the wind, and his right hand encounters oil.
Iron sharpens iron, so a man sharpens the countenance of his friend.
He who keeps the fig tree shall eat the fruit of it, and he who regards his master shall be honored.
As in water face is to face, so the heart of a man is to a man.
Sheol and Abaddon are never satisfied, and the eyes of man are never satisfied.
The refining pot is for silver, and the furnace for gold, and a man is tried by his praise.
Though thou should pound a fool in a mortar with a pestle along with crushed grain, yet his foolishness will not depart from him.
Be thou diligent to know the state of thy flocks, and look well to thy herds.
For riches are not forever. And does the crown endure to all generations?
The hay is carried, and the tender grass shows itself, and the herbs of the mountains are gathered in.
The lambs are for thy clothing, and the goats are the cost of the field.
And then will be goats' milk enough for thy food; for the food of thy household, and maintenance for thy maidens.

A wicked man flees when no man pursues, but the righteous are bold as a lion.
For the transgression of a land many are the rulers of it. But by men of understanding and knowledge the state shall be prolonged.
A needy man who oppresses the poor is a sweeping rain which leaves no food.
Those who forsake the law praise the wicked, but such as keep the law contend with them.
Evil men do not understand justice, but those who seek Jehovah understand all things.
Better is the poor man who walks in his integrity, than he who is perverse in his ways, though he be rich.
He who keeps the law is a wise son, but he who is a companion of gluttons shames his father.
He who augments his substance by interest and increase, gathers it for him who has pity on the poor.
He who turns away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is an abomination.
He who causes the upright to go astray in an evil way, he shall fall himself into his own pit. But the perfect shall inherit good.
The rich man is wise in his own conceit, but a poor man who has understanding searches him out.
When the righteous triumph, there is great glory, but when the wicked rise, men hide themselves.
He who covers his transgressions shall not prosper, but he who confesses and forsakes them shall obtain mercy.
Happy is the man who fears always, but he who hardens his heart shall fall into mischief.
A roaring lion, and a ranging bear, is a wicked ruler over a poor people.
The ruler who lacks understanding is also a great oppressor, but he who hates covetousness shall prolong his days.
A man who is laden with the blood of any person shall flee to the pit. Let no man stay him.
He who walks uprightly shall be delivered, but he who is perverse in his ways shall fall at once.
He who tills his land shall have plenty of bread, but he who follows after vanity shall have poverty enough.
A faithful man shall abound with blessings, but he who makes haste to be rich shall not be unpunished.
To have respect of persons is not good, nor that a man should transgress for a piece of bread.
He who has an evil eye hastens after riches, and does not know that want shall come upon him.
He who rebukes a man shall afterward find more favor than he who flatters with the tongue.
He who robs his father or his mother, and says, It is no transgression, the same is the companion of a destroyer.
He who is of a greedy spirit stirs up strife, but he who puts his trust in Jehovah shall be made fat.
He who trusts in his own heart is a fool, but he who walks wisely, he shall be delivered.
He who gives to the poor shall not lack, but he who hides his eyes shall have many a curse.
When the wicked rise, men hide themselves, but when they perish, the righteous increase.

He who, being often reproved, hardens his neck shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy.
When the righteous are increased, the people rejoice, but when a wicked man bears rule, the people sigh.
He who loves wisdom delights his father, but he who keeps company with harlots wastes his substance.
By justice the king establishes the land, but he who exacts gifts overthrows it.
A man who flatters his neighbor spreads a net for his steps.
In the transgression of an evil man there is a snare, but a righteous man sings and rejoices.
A righteous man takes knowledge of the cause of the poor. A wicked man has no such understanding to know.
Scoffers set a city in a flame, but wise men turn away wrath.
If a wise man has a controversy with a foolish man, whether he be angry or laugh, there will be no rest.
Bloodthirsty men hate him who is perfect, but the upright seek his soul.
A fool utters all his anger, but a wise man keeps it back and calms it.
If a ruler hearkens to falsehood, all his servants are wicked.
The poor man and the oppressor meet together. Jehovah enlightens the eyes of them both.
The king who faithfully judges the poor, his throne shall be established forever.
The rod and reproof give wisdom, but a child left to himself causes shame to his mother.
When the wicked are increased, transgression increases, but the righteous shall look upon their fall.
Correct thy son, and he will give thee rest, yea, he will give delight to thy soul.
Where there is no vision, the people cast off restraint, but he who keeps the law, happy is he.
A servant will not be corrected by words, for though he understands, he will not give heed.
See thou a man who is hasty in his words? There is more hope for a fool than for him.
He who brings up his servant gently from childhood shall have him become a son at the last.
An angry man stirs up strife, and a wrathful man abounds in transgression.
A man's pride shall bring him low, but he who is of a lowly spirit shall obtain honor.
He who is partner with a thief hates his own soul; he hears the adjuration and utters nothing.
The fear of man brings a snare, but he who puts his trust in Jehovah shall be safe.
Many seek the ruler's favor, but a man's justice is from Jehovah.
An unjust man is an abomination to the righteous, and he who is upright in the way is an abomination to a wicked man.

Surely I am more brutish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man,
and I have not learned wisdom, nor have I the knowledge of the Holy.
Who has ascended up into heaven, and descended? Who has gathered the wind in his fists? Who has bound the waters in his garment? Who has established all the ends of the earth? What is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou know?
Every word of God is tried. He is a shield to those who take refuge in him.
Add thou not to his words, lest he reprove thee, and thou be found a liar.
Remove far from me falsehood and lies. Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with the food that is needful for me,
lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, Who is Jehovah? or lest I be poor, and steal, and use the name of my God profanely.
Slander not a servant to his master, lest he curse thee, and thou be held guilty.
There is a generation who curses their father, and does not bless their mother.
There is a generation who are pure in their own eyes, and yet are not washed from their filthiness.
There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes, and their eyelids are lifted up.
There is a generation whose teeth are swords, and their jaw teeth, knives, to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men.
Sheol, and the barren womb, the earth that is not satisfied with water, and the fire that does not say, Enough.
The eye that mocks at his father, and despises to obey his mother, the ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall eat it.
The way of an eagle in the air, the way of a serpent upon a rock, the way of a ship in the midst of the sea, and the way of a man with a maiden.
She eats, and wipes her mouth, and says, I have done no iniquity.
For a servant when he is king, and a fool when he is filled with food,
for a hateful woman when she is married, and a handmaid that is heir to her mistress.
The ants are a people not strong, yet they prepare their food in the summer,
the conies are but a feeble folk, yet they make their houses in the rocks,
the locusts have no king, yet they go forth all of them by bands,
the lizard takes hold with her hands, yet she is in kings' palaces.
The lion, which is mightiest among beasts, and turns not away from any,
the greyhound, also the he-goat, and the king against whom there is no rising up.
If thou have done foolishly in lifting up thyself, or if thou have thought evil, lay thy hand upon thy mouth.
For the churning of milk brings forth butter, and the wringing of the nose brings forth blood, so the forcing of wrath brings forth strife.

The words of king Lemuel, the oracle which his mother taught him.
What, my son? And what, O son of my womb? And what, O son of my vows?
Give not thy strength to women, nor thy ways to that which destroys kings.
It is not for kings, O Lemuel, it is not for kings to drink wine, nor for rulers to say, Where is strong drink?
Lest they drink, and forget the law, and pervert the justice due to any who is afflicted.
Give strong drink to him who is ready to perish, and wine to the bitter in soul.
Let him drink, and forget his need, and remember his misery no more.
Open thy mouth for the mute, in the cause of all such as are left desolate.
Open thy mouth, judge righteously, and minister justice to the poor and needy.
A worthy woman who can find? For her price is far above rubies.
The heart of her husband trusts in her, and he shall have no lack of gain.
She does him good and not evil all the days of her life.
She seeks wool and flax, and works willingly with her hands.
she brings her bread from afar.
She also rises while it is yet night, and gives food to her household, and their task to her maidens.
She considers a field, and buys it. With the fruit of her hands she plants a vineyard.
She girds her loins with strength, and makes strong her arms.
She perceives that her merchandise is profitable. Her lamp does not go out by night.
She lays her hands to the distaff, and her hands hold the spindle.
She stretches out her hand to the poor, yea, she reaches forth her hands to the needy.
She is not afraid of the snow for her household, for all her household are clothed with scarlet.
She makes for herself carpets of tapestry. Her clothing is fine linen and purple.
Her husband is known in the gates when he sits among the elders of the land.
She makes linen garments and sells them, and delivers girdles to the merchant.
Strength and dignity are her clothing, and she laughs at the time to come.
She opens her mouth with wisdom, and the law of kindness is on her tongue.
She looks well to the ways of her household, and does not eat the bread of idleness.
Her sons rise up, and call her blessed. Her husband also, and he praises her.
Many daughters have done worthily, but thou excel them all.
Charm is deceitful, and beauty is vain, but a woman who fears Jehovah, she shall be praised.
Give her of the fruit of her hands, and let her works praise her in the gates.

Ecclesiastes

The words of the Preacher, the son of David, king in Jerusalem.
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, vanity of vanities, all is vanity.
What profit has man from all his labor in which he labors under the sun?
One generation goes, and another generation comes, but the earth abides forever.
The sun also arises, and the sun goes down and hastens to its place where it arises.
The wind goes toward the south, and turns around to the north. It turns around continually in its course, and the wind returns again to its circuits.
All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea is not full. To the place from where the rivers come, there they go again.
All things are full of weariness, man cannot utter it. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor the ear filled with hearing.
That which has been is that which shall be, and that which has been done is that which shall be done. And there is no new thing under the sun.
Is there a thing of which it may be said, See, this is new? It has been long ago, in the ages which were before us.
There is no remembrance of the former things, nor shall there be any remembrance of the latter that are to come, among those who shall come after.
I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem.
And I applied my heart to seek and to search out by wisdom concerning all that is done under heaven. It is a great tribulation that God has given to the sons of men to be exercised therewith.
I have seen all the works that are done under the sun, and, behold, all is vanity and a striving after wind.
That which is crooked cannot be made straight, and that which is wanting cannot be numbered.
I communed with my own heart, saying, Lo, I have gotten for me great wisdom above all who were before me in Jerusalem. Yea, my heart has had great experience of wisdom and knowledge.
And I applied my heart to know wisdom, and to know madness and folly. I perceived that this also was a striving after wind.
For in much wisdom is much grief, and he who increases knowledge increases sorrow.

I said in my heart, Come now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy pleasure. And, behold, this also was vanity.
I said of laughter, It is mad, and of mirth, What does it do?
I searched in my heart how to cheer my flesh with wine (my heart yet guiding me with wisdom), and how to lay hold on folly, till I might see what it was good for the sons of men that they should do under heaven all the days of their life.
I made for me great works. I built for me houses. I planted for me vineyards.
I made for me gardens and parks, and I planted trees in them of all kinds of fruit.
I made for me pools of water, to water from there the forest where trees were reared.
I bought men-servants and maid-servants, and had servants born in my house. I also had great possessions of herds and flocks, above all who were before me in Jerusalem.
I also gathered for me silver and gold, and the treasure of kings and of the provinces. I got for me men-singers and women-singers, and the luxuries of the sons of men, and a wife and wives.
So I was great, and increased more than all who were before me in Jerusalem. Also my wisdom remained with me.
And whatever my eyes desired I kept not from them. I did not withhold my heart from any joy. For my heart rejoiced because of all my labor, and this was my portion from all my labor.
Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do, and, behold, all was vanity and a striving after wind, and there was no profit under the sun.
And I turned myself to behold wisdom and madness and folly. For what can the man do who comes after the king? Even that which has been done long ago.
Then I saw that wisdom excels folly as far as light excels darkness.
The wise man's eyes are in his head, and the fool walks in darkness. And yet I perceived that one event happens to them all.
Then I said in my heart, As it happens to the fool, so it will happen even to me, and why then was I more wise? Then I said in my heart that this also is vanity.
For of the wise man, even as of the fool, there is no remembrance forever, seeing that in the days to come all will have been long forgotten. And how the wise man dies even as the fool!
So I hated life, because the work that is wrought under the sun was grievous to me. For all is vanity and a striving after wind.
And I hated all my labor in which I labored under the sun, seeing that I must leave it to the man who shall be after me.
And who knows whether he will be a wise man or a fool? Yet he will have rule over all my labor in which I have labored, and in which I have shown myself wise under the sun. This also is vanity.
Therefore I turned about to cause my heart to despair concerning all the labor in which I had labored under the sun.
For there is a man whose labor is with wisdom, and with knowledge, and with skillfulness, yet he shall leave it to a man who has not labored in it for his portion. This also is vanity and a great evil.
For what has a man of all his labor, and of the striving of his heart in which he labors under the sun?
For all his days are but sorrows, and his travail is grief, yea, even in the night his heart takes no rest. This also is vanity.
There is nothing better for a man than that he should eat and drink, and make his soul enjoy good in his labor. This also I saw, that it is from the hand of God.
For who can eat, or who can have enjoyment, without him?
For to the man who pleases him God gives wisdom and knowledge and joy, but to the sinner he gives travail, to gather and to heap up, that he may give to him who pleases God. This also is vanity and a striving after wind.

a time to be born, and a time to die, a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted,
a time to kill, and a time to heal, a time to break down, and a time to build up,
a time to weep, and a time to laugh, a time to mourn, and a time to dance,
a time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together, a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing,
a time to seek, and a time to lose, a time to keep, and a time to cast away,
a time to tear, and a time to sew, a time to keep silence, and a time to speak,
a time to love, and a time to hate, a time for war, and a time for peace.
What profit has he who works in that in which he labors?
I have seen the travail which God has given to the sons of men to be employed therewith.
He has made everything beautiful in its time. Also he has set eternity in their heart, yet so that man cannot find out the work that God has done from the beginning even to the end.
I know that there is nothing better for them, than to rejoice, and to do good as long as they live.
And also that every man should eat and drink, and enjoy good in all his labor. It is the gift of God.
I know that, whatever God does, it shall be forever. Nothing can be put to it, nor anything taken from it. And God has done it that men should fear before him.
That which is, has been long ago, and that which is to be, has long ago been. And God seeks again that which has passed away.
And moreover I saw under the sun, in the place of justice, that wickedness was there, and in the place of righteousness, that wickedness was there.
I said in my heart, God will judge the righteous man and the wicked man, for there is a time there for every purpose and for every work.
I said in my heart, It is because of the sons of men, that God may prove them, and that they may see that they themselves are beasts.
For that which befalls the sons of men befalls beasts, even one thing befalls them; as the one dies, so dies the other. Yea, they all have one breath, and man has no preeminence above the beasts; for all is vanity.
All go to one place. All are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.
Who knows the spirit of man, whether it goes upward, and the spirit of the beast, whether it goes downward to the earth?
Therefore I saw that there is nothing better, than that a man should rejoice in his works, for that is his portion. For who shall bring him back to see what shall be after him?

Then I returned and saw all the oppressions that are done under the sun. And, behold, the tears of such as were oppressed, and they had no comforter. And on the side of their oppressors there was power, but they had no comforter.
Therefore I praised the dead who have long been dead more than the living who are yet alive.
Yea, better than them both is him who has not yet been, who has not seen the evil work that is done under the sun.
Then I saw all labor and every skilful work, that for this a man is envied by his neighbor. This also is vanity and a striving after wind.
The fool folds his hands together, and eats his own flesh.
Better is a handful, with quietness, than two handfuls with labor and striving after wind.
Then I returned and saw vanity under the sun.
There is one man who is alone, and he has not a second, yea, he has neither son nor brother. Yet there is no end of all his labor, nor are his eyes satisfied with riches. For whom then, he says, do I labor, and deprive my soul of good? This also is vanity, yea, it is a great travail.
Two are better than one, because they have a good reward for their labor.
For if they fall, the one will lift up his fellow, but woe to him who is alone when he falls, and has not another to lift him up.
Again, if two lie together, then they have warmth, but how can one be warm alone?
And if a man prevails against him who is alone, two shall withstand him. And a threefold cord is not quickly broken.
Better is a poor and wise youth than an old and foolish king who does not know how to receive admonition any more.
For he came forth out of prison to be king, yea, even in his kingdom he was born poor.
I saw all the living who walk under the sun, that they were with the youth, the second, who stood up in his stead.
There was no end of all the people, even of all those over whom he was. Yet those who come after shall not rejoice in him. Surely this also is vanity and a striving after wind.

Keep thy foot when thou go to the house of God, for to draw near to hear is better than to give the sacrifice of fools. For they know not that they do evil.
Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter anything before God. For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth. Therefore let thy words be few.
For a dream comes with a multitude of business, and a fool's voice with a multitude of words.
When thou vow a vow to God, defer not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in fools. Pay that which thou vow.
Better is it that thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and not pay.
Do not allow thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, nor say thou before the agent, that is was an error. Why should God be angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thy hands?
For in the multitude of dreams there are vanities, and in many words. But fear thou God.
If thou see the oppression of a poor man, and the violent wresting of justice and righteousness in a province, marvel not at the matter. For a man higher than the high is observing, and there are higher men than they.
Moreover the abundance of the land is for all. The king himself is served by the field.
He who loves silver shall not be satisfied with silver, nor he who loves abundance, with increase. This also is vanity.
When goods increase, they are increased who eat them. And what advantage is there to the owner of it, except the beholding of them with his eyes?
The sleep of a laboring man is sweet, whether he eats little or much, but the fullness of the rich will not allow him to sleep.
Riches were kept by the owner of it to his hurt.
And those riches perish in a bad venture. And if he has begotten a son, there is nothing in his hand.
As he came forth from his mother's womb, naked shall he go again as he came, and shall take nothing for his labor, which he may carry away in his hand.
And this also is a grievous evil, that in all points as he came, so shall he go. And what profit has he that he labored for the wind?
All his days also he eats in gloom, and he is greatly troubled, and has depression and anger.
Behold, that which I have seen to be good and to be fitting is for a man to eat and to drink, and to enjoy good in all his labor in which he labors under the sun all the days of his life which God has given him, for this is his portion.
Every man also to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has given him power to eat of it, and to take his portion, and to rejoice in his labor-this is the gift of God.
For he shall not much remember the days of his life, because God answers him in the joy of his heart.

A man to whom God gives riches, wealth, and honor, so that he lacks nothing for his soul of all that he desires, yet God does not give him power to eat of it, but an alien eats it. This is vanity, and it is an evil disease.
If a man begets a hundred sons, and lives many years so that the days of his years are many, but his soul is not filled with good, and moreover he has no burial, I say, that an untimely birth is better than he.
For it comes in vanity, and departs in darkness, and the name of it is covered with darkness.
Moreover it has not seen the sun nor known it, this one has rest rather than the other.
Yea, though he lives a thousand years twice told, and yet enjoys no good, do not all go to one place?
All the labor of man is for his mouth, and yet the appetite is not filled.
For what advantage has the wise man more than the fool? What has the poor man, who knows how to walk before the living?
Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire. This also is vanity and a striving after wind.
Whatever has been, the name of it was given long ago, and it is know what man is. Neither can he contend with him who is mightier than he.
Since there are many things that increase vanity, what is man the better?
For who knows what is good for man in life, all the days of his vain life which he spends as a shadow? For who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun?

A good name is better than precious oil, and the day of death, than the day of birth.
It is better to go to the house of mourning than to go to the house of feasting. For that is the end of all men, and the living will lay it to his heart.
Sorrow is better than laughter, for by the sadness of the countenance the heart is made glad.
The heart of the wise is in the house of mourning, but the heart of fools is in the house of mirth.
It is better to hear the rebuke of a wise man, than for a man to hear the song of fools.
For as the crackling of thorns under a pot, so is the laughter of the fool. This also is vanity.
Surely oppression makes the wise man foolish, and a bribe destroys the understanding.
Better is the end of a thing than the beginning of it. The patient in spirit is better than the proud in spirit.
Be not hasty in thy spirit to be angry, for anger rests in the bosom of fools.
Say thou not, What is the cause that the former days were better than these? For thou do not inquire wisely concerning this.
Wisdom is as good as an inheritance, yea, it is more excellent for those who see the sun.
For wisdom is a defense, even as money is a defense. But the excellency of knowledge is, that wisdom preserves the life of him who has it.
Consider the work of God. For who can make that straight, which he has made crooked?
In the day of prosperity be joyful, and in the day of adversity consider. Yea, God has made the one side by side with the other, to the end that man should not find out anything after him.
All this I have seen in my days of vanity. There is a righteous man who perishes in his righteousness, and there is a wicked man who prolongs his life in his evil-doing.
Be not over-righteous, nor show thyself too wise. Why should thou destroy thyself?
Do not much wrong, nor be thou a fool. Why should thou die before thy time?
It is good that thou should take hold of this, yea, also from that withdraw not thy hand. For he who fears God shall come forth from them all.
Wisdom is a strength to the wise man more than ten rulers that are in a city.
Surely there is not a righteous man upon earth that does good, and sins not.
Also do not take heed to all words that are spoken, lest thou hear thy servant curse thee.
For many times also thine own heart knows that thou thyself likewise have cursed others.
All this I have proved in wisdom. I said, I will be wise, but it was far from me.
That which is, is far off and exceedingly deep. Who can find it out?
I turned about, and my heart was set to know and to search out, and to seek wisdom and the reason of things, and to know that wickedness is folly, and that foolishness is madness.
And I find more bitter than death the woman whose heart is snares and nets, and whose hands are chains. He who pleases God shall escape from her, but the sinner shall be taken by her.
Behold, I have found this, says the Preacher, laying one thing to another, to find out the account,
among a thousand I have found one man, but among all those I have not found a woman.
That God made man upright, but they have sought out many contrivances.

Who is as the wise man? And who knows the interpretation of a thing? A man's wisdom makes his face to shine, and the hardness of his face is changed.
I say, Keep the king's command, and that because of the oath of God.
Be not hasty to go out of his presence. Persist not in an evil matter, for he does whatever pleases him.
For the king's word has power, and who may say to him, What are thou doing?
He who keeps a commandment shall know no evil thing. And a wise man's heart discerns the time and decision.
For to every purpose there is a time and decision, although the distress of man is great upon him.
For he knows not that which shall be, for who can tell him how it shall be?
There is no man who has power over the spirit to retain the spirit, nor has he power over the day of death. And there is no discharge in war. Neither shall wickedness deliver him who is given to it.
All this I have seen, and applied my heart to every work that is done under the sun. There is a time in which one man has power over another to his hurt.
So I saw the wicked buried, who had come and gone from the place of the holy, and they were praised in the city where they had so done. This also is vanity.
Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil.
Though a sinner does evil a hundred times, and prolongs his days, yet surely I know that it shall be well with those who fear God, who fear before him.
But it shall not be well with a wicked man, neither shall he prolong his days, which are as a shadow, because he did not fear before God.
There is a vanity which is done upon the earth, that there are righteous men to whom it happens according to the work of the wicked, again, there are wicked men to whom it happens according to the work of the righteous. I said that this also is vanity.
Then I commended joy, because a man has no better thing under the sun, than to eat, and to drink, and to be cheerful. For that shall abide with him in his labor all the days of his life which God has given him under the sun.
When I applied my heart to know wisdom, and to see the business that is done upon the earth (for also there is he who sees sleep with his eyes neither day nor night),
then I beheld all the work of God, that man cannot find out the work that is done under the sun. Because however much a man labors to seek it out, yet he shall not find it. Yea moreover, though a wise man thinks to know it, yet he shall not be able to find it.

For all this I laid to my heart, even to explore all this, that the righteous, and the wise, and their works, are in the hand of God. No man understands, either love or hatred. All is before them.
All things come alike to all. There is one event to the righteous man and to the wicked man, to the good man, and to the clean man, and to the unclean man, to him who sacrifices and to him who does not sacrifice, as is the good man, so is the sinner, and he who swears, as he who fears an oath.
This is an evil in all that is done under the sun, that there is one event to all. Yea also, the heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and madness is in their heart while they live, and after that they go to the dead.
Because to him who is joined with all the living there is hope, for a living dog is better than a dead lion.
For the living know that they shall die, but the dead know not anything, nor have they any more a reward, for the memory of them is forgotten.
As well their love, as their hatred and their envy, has perished long ago, nor have they any more a portion forever in anything that is done under the sun.
Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God has already accepted thy works.
Let thy garments be always white, and let not thy head lack oil.
Live joyfully with the wife whom thou love all the days of thy life of vanity, which he has given thee under the sun, all thy days of vanity. For that is thy portion in life, and in thy labor in which thou labor under the sun.
Whatever thy hand finds to do, do with thy might, for there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in Sheol, where thou go.
I returned, and saw under the sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and chance happens to them all.
For man also does not know his time. As the fishes that are taken in an evil net, and as the birds that are caught in the snare, even so are the sons of men snared in an evil time when it falls suddenly upon them.
There was a little city, and few men within it. And there came a great king against it, and besieged it, and built great bulwarks against it.
Now there was found in it a poor wise man. And he by his wisdom delivered the city, yet no man remembered that same poor man.
Then I said, Wisdom is better than strength. Nevertheless the poor man's wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard.
The words of the wise heard in quiet are better than the cry of him who rules among fools.
Wisdom is better than weapons of war, but one sinner destroys much good.

Dead flies cause the oil of the perfumer to send forth an evil odor, so a little folly outweighs wisdom and honor.
A wise man's heart is at his right hand, but a fool's heart at his left.
Yea also, when the fool walks by the way, his understanding fails him, and he says to everyone that he is a fool.
If the spirit of the ruler rises up against thee, leave not thy place, for deference allays great offenses.
Folly is set in great dignity, and the rich sit in a low place.
I have seen servants upon horses, and rulers walking like servants upon the earth.
He who digs a pit shall fall into it, and he who breaks through a wall, a serpent shall bite him.
He who hews out stones shall be hurt therewith, and he who splits wood is endangered thereby.
If the iron be blunt, and he does not whet the edge, then he must increase strength. But wisdom is advantageous to make right.
If the serpent bites before it is charmed, then is there no advantage in the charmer.
The words of a wise man's mouth are gracious, but the lips of a fool will swallow himself up.
The beginning of the words of his mouth is foolishness, and the end of his talk is mischievous madness.
A fool also multiplies words; yet man knows not what shall be, and that which shall be after him, who can tell him?
The labor of fools wearies every one of them, for he knows not how to go to the city.
Woe to thee, O land, when thy king is a child, and thy rulers feast in the morning!
Happy are thou, O land, when thy king is the son of noble men, and thy rulers feast in due season, for strength, and not for drunkenness!
By slothfulness the roof sinks in, and through idleness of the hands the house leaks.
A feast is made for laughter, and wine makes glad the life, and money answers all things.
Revile not the king, no, not in thy thought, and revile not the rich in thy bedchamber. For a bird of the heavens shall carry the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter.

Cast thy bread upon the waters, for thou shall find it after many days.
Give a portion to seven, yea, even to eight, for thou know not what evil shall be upon the earth.
If the clouds are full of rain, they empty themselves upon the earth, and if a tree falls toward the south, or toward the north, in the place where the tree falls, there shall it be.
He who observes the wind shall not sow, and he who regards the clouds shall not reap.
As thou know not what is the way of the wind, nor how the bones grow in the womb of her who is with child, even so thou know not the work of God who does all.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withhold not thy hand, for thou know not which shall prosper, whether this or that, or whether they both shall be alike good.
Truly the light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the eyes to behold the sun.
Yea, if a man lives many years, let him rejoice in them all. But let him remember the days of darkness, for they shall be many. All that comes is vanity.
Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment.
Therefore remove sorrow from thy heart, and put away evil from thy flesh, for youth and the dawn of life are vanity.

Remember also thy Creator in the days of thy youth, before the evil days come, and the years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them,
before the sun, and the light, and the moon, and the stars, are darkened, and the clouds return after the rain,
in the day when the keepers of the house shall tremble, and the strong men shall bow themselves, and the grinders cease because they are few, and those who look out of the windows shall be darkened,
and the doors shall be shut in the street, when the sound of the grinding is low, and he shall rise up at the voice of a bird, and all the daughters of music shall be brought low,
yea, they shall be afraid of height, and terrors shall be in the way, and the almond tree shall blossom, and the grasshopper shall be a burden, and desire shall fail, because man goes to his everlasting home, and the mourners go about the streets,
before the silver cord is loosed, or the golden bowl is broken, or the pitcher is broken at the fountain, or the wheel broken at the cistern,
and the dust returns to the earth as it was, and the spirit returns to God who gave it.
Vanity of vanities, says the Preacher, all is vanity.
And further, because the Preacher was wise, he still taught the people knowledge. Yea, he pondered, and sought out, and set in order many proverbs.
The Preacher sought to find out acceptable words, and that which was written uprightly-words of truth.
The words of the wise are as goads, and as nails fastened by the masters of assemblies. They have been given from one shepherd.
of making many books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh.
Fear God, and keep his commandments, for this is the whole of man.
For God will bring every work into judgment, with every hidden thing, whether good or evil.

Song of Solomon

The Song of songs, which is Solomon's.
Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth, for thy love is better than wine.
Thine oils have a good fragrance. Thy name is oil poured forth. Therefore the virgins love thee.
Draw me, we will run after thee. The king has brought me into his chambers. We will be glad and rejoice in thee. We will make mention of thy love more than of wine. Rightly do they love thee.
I am black, but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon.
Look not upon me, because I am swarthy, because the sun has scorched me. My mother's sons were incensed against me. They made me keeper of the vineyards, but my own vineyard I have not kept.
Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feed thy flock, where thou make it to rest at noon. For why should I be as she who is veiled beside the flocks of thy companions?
If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the flock, and feed thy kids beside the shepherds' tents.
I have compared thee, O my love, to a steed in Pharaoh's chariots.
Thy cheeks are comely with plaits of hair, thy neck with strings of jewels.
We will make thee plaits of gold with studs of silver.
While the king sat at his table, my spikenard sent forth its fragrance.
My beloved is to me a bundle of myrrh that lies between my breasts.
My beloved is to me a cluster of henna-flowers in the vineyards of En-gedi.
Behold, thou are fair, my love, behold thou are fair. Thine eyes are doves.
Behold, thou are fair, my beloved, yea, pleasant. Also our couch is green.
The beams of our house are cedars, our rafters are firs.

I am a rose of Sharon. A lily of the valleys.
As a lily among thorns, So is my love among the daughters.
As the apple tree among the trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste.
He brought me to the banquet house, and his banner over me was love.
Sustain ye me with raisins, refresh me with apples, for I am sick from love.
His left hand is under my head, and his right hand embraces me.
I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, or by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake love, until it please.
The voice of my beloved! Behold, he comes, leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills.
My beloved is like a roe or a young hart. Behold, he stands behind our wall. He looks in at the windows. He glances through the lattice.
My beloved spoke, and said to me, Rise up, my love, my fair one, and come away.
For, lo, the winter is past. The rain is over and gone.
The flowers appear on the earth. The time of the singing has come, and the voice of the turtledove is heard in our land.
The fig tree ripens her green figs, and the vines are in blossom. They give forth their fragrance. Arise, my love, my fair one, and come away.
O my dove, who are in the clefts of the rock, in the covert of the steep place, let me see thy countenance; let me hear thy voice. For sweet is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely.
Take us the foxes, the little foxes, that spoil the vineyards. For our vineyards are in blossom.
My beloved is mine, and I am his. He feeds among the lilies.
Until the day be cool, and the shadows flee away, turn, my beloved, and be thou like a roe or a young hart upon the mountains of Bether.

By night on my bed I sought him whom my soul loves. I sought him, but I did not find him.
I said, I will rise now, and go around the city. In the streets and in the broad ways I will seek him whom my soul loves. I sought him, but I did not find him.
The watchmen who go about the city found me. I said, Did ye see him whom my soul loves?
It was but a little that I passed from them when I found him whom my soul loves. I held him, and would not let him go until I had brought him into my mother's house, and into the chamber of her who conceived me.
I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes, or by the hinds of the field, that ye stir not up, nor awake love, until it please.
Who is this who comes up from the wilderness like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?
Behold, it is the litter of Solomon. Sixty mighty men are around it, of the mighty men of Israel.
They all handle the sword, and are expert in war. Every man has his sword upon his thigh, because of fear in the night.
King Solomon made himself a palanquin of the wood of Lebanon.
He made the pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold, the seat thereof of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, from the daughters of Jerusalem.
Go forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold king Solomon with the crown with which his mother has crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the day of the gladness of his heart.

Behold, thou are fair, my love, behold, thou are fair. Thine eyes are doves behind thy veil. Thy hair is as a flock of goats that lie along the side of mount Gilead.
Thy teeth are like a flock of ewes that are newly shorn, which have come up from the washing, of which every one has twins, and none is bereaved among them.
Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy mouth is comely. Thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate behind thy veil.
Thy neck is like the tower of David built for an armory, on which there hang a thousand bucklers, all the shields of the mighty men.
Thy two breasts are like two fawns that are twins of a roe, which feed among the lilies.
Until the day is cool, and the shadows flee away, I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.
Thou are all fair, my love, and there is no spot in thee.
Come with me from Lebanon, my bride, with me from Lebanon. Look from the top of Amana, from the top of Senir and Hermon, from the lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards.
Thou have ravished my heart, my sister, my bride. Thou have ravished my heart with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy neck.
How fair is thy love, my sister, my bride! How much better is thy love than wine, and the fragrance of thine oils than all manner of spices!
Thy lips, O my bride, drop the honeycomb. Honey and milk are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.
A garden shut up is my sister, my bride, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.
Thy shoots are an orchard of pomegranates, with precious fruits, henna with spikenard plants,
spikenard and saffron, calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense, myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices.
Thou are a fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and flowing streams from Lebanon.
Awake, O north wind, and come, thou south, blow upon my garden, that the spices of it may flow out. Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his precious fruits.

I have come into my garden, my sister, my bride. I have gathered my myrrh with my spice. I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey. I have drunk my wine with my milk. Eat, O friends. Drink, yea. Drink abundantly, O beloved.
I was asleep, but my heart awoke. It is the voice of my beloved who knocks, saying, Open to me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled. For my head is filled with dew, my locks with the drops of the night.
I have put off my garment, how shall I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them?
My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door, and my heart was moved for him.
I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands drops with myrrh, and my fingers with liquid myrrh, upon the handles of the bolt.
I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. My soul had failed me when he spoke. I sought him, but I could not find him. I called him, but he gave me no answer.
The watchmen who go about the city found me. They smote me, they wounded me. The keepers of the walls took away my mantle from me.
I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that ye tell him that I am sick from love.
What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou fairest among women? What is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou do so adjure us?
My beloved is white and ruddy, the chief among ten thousand.
His head is the most fine gold. His locks are bushy, black as a raven.
His eyes are like doves beside the water-brooks, washed with milk, fitly set.
His cheeks are as a bed of spices, banks of sweet herbs. His lips are lilies, dropping liquid myrrh.
His hands are rings of gold set with beryl. His body is ivory work overlaid with sapphires.
His legs are pillars of marble, set upon sockets of fine gold. His aspect is like Lebanon, excellent as the cedars.
His mouth is most sweet. Yea, he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.

Where has thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women? Where has thy beloved turned, that we may seek him with thee?
My beloved has gone down to his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies.
I am my beloved's, and my beloved is mine. He feeds among the lilies.
Thou are fair, O my love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, sublime as an army with banners.
Turn away thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me. Thy hair is as a flock of goats that lie along the side of Gilead.
Thy teeth are like a flock of ewes, which have come up from the washing, of which every one has twins, and none is bereaved among them.
Thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate behind thy veil.
There are sixty queens, and eighty concubines, and virgins without number.
My dove, my undefiled, is but one. She is the only one of her mother. She is the choice one of her who bore her. The daughters saw her, and called her blessed, yea, the queens and the concubines, and they praised her.
Who is she who looks forth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, sublime as an army with banners?
I went down into the garden of nuts, to see the green plants of the valley, to see whether the vine budded, and the pomegranates were in flower.
Before I was aware, my soul set me among the chariots of my princely people.
Return, return, O Shulammite, return, return, that we may look upon thee. Why will ye look upon the Shulammite, as upon the dance of two armies?

How beautiful are thy feet in sandals, O prince's daughter! Thy rounded thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a skilful workman.
Thy body is a round goblet, no mingled wine is wanting. Thy waist is a heap of wheat set about with lilies.
Thy two breasts are like two fawns that are twins of a roe.
Thy neck is like the tower of ivory. Thine eyes, the pools in Heshbon, by the gate of Bath-rabbim. Thy nose is like the tower of Lebanon which looks toward Damascus.
Thy head upon thee is like Carmel, and the hair of thy head like purple. The king is held captive in the tresses.
How fair and how pleasant thou are, O love, for delights!
This thy stature is like to a palm tree, and thy breasts to its clusters.
I said, I will climb up into the palm tree. I will take hold of the branches of it. Let thy breasts be as clusters of the vine, and the smell of thy breath like apples,
and thy mouth like the best wine, that goes down smoothly for my beloved, gliding through the lips and teeth.
I am my beloved's, and his desire is toward me.
Come, my beloved, let us go forth into the field. Let us lodge in the villages.
Let us get up early to the vineyards. Let us see whether the vine has budded, its blossom is open, the pomegranates are in flower. There I will give thee my love.
The mandrakes give forth fragrance. And at our doors are all manner of precious fruits, new and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.

Oh that thou were as my brother, who sucked the breasts of my mother! When I should find thee outside, I would kiss thee. Yes, and none would despise me.
I would lead thee, and bring thee into my mother's house, who would instruct me. I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the juice of my pomegranate.
His left hand under my head, and his right hand should embrace me.
I adjure you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor awake love, until it please.
Who is this who comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved? Under the apple tree I awoke thee. There thy mother was in travail with thee. There she who brought thee forth was in travail.
Set me as a seal upon thy heart, as a seal upon thine arm. For love is strong as death, jealousy is cruel as Sheol. The flashes of it are flashes of fire, a most vehement flame.
Many waters cannot quench love, nor can floods drown it. If a man would give all the substance of his house for love, he would be utterly scorned.
We have a little sister, and she has no breasts. What shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?
If she is a wall, we will build upon her a turret of silver. And if she is a door, we will enclose her with boards of cedar.
I am a wall, and my breasts like the towers. Then I was in his eyes as one who found peace.
Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon. He let out the vineyard to keepers. Every one for the fruit of it was to bring a thousand pieces of silver.
My vineyard, which is mine, is before me. Thou, O Solomon, shall have the thousand, and those who keep the fruit of it, two hundred.
Thou who dwell in the gardens, the companions hearken for thy voice. Cause me to hear it.
Make haste, my beloved, and be thou like to a roe or to a young hart upon the mountains of spices.

Isaiah

The vision of Isaiah the son of Amoz, which he saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah.
Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth, for Jehovah has spoken. I have nourished and brought up sons, and they have rebelled against me.
The ox knows his owner, and the donkey his master's crib, but Israel does not know; my people does not consider.
Ah sinful nation, a people laden with iniquity, a seed of evildoers, sons who deal corruptly! They have forsaken Jehovah. They have despised the Holy One of Israel. They have gone away backward.
Why will ye still be stricken, that ye revolt more and more? The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint.
From the sole of the foot even to the head there is no soundness in it, but wounds, and bruises, and fresh stripes. They have not been closed nor bound up nor soothed with oil.
Your country is desolate. Your cities are burned with fire. Your land-strangers devour it in your presence, and it is desolate, as overthrown by strangers.
And the daughter of Zion is left as a booth in a vineyard, as a shed in a garden of cucumbers, as a besieged city.
Unless Jehovah of hosts had left to us a seed, we should have been as Sodom, we should have been like Gomorrah.
Hear the word of Jehovah, ye rulers of Sodom, give ear to the law of our God, ye people of Gomorrah.
What to me is the multitude of your sacrifices? says Jehovah. I have had enough of the burnt offerings of rams, and the fat of fed beasts. And I do not delight in the blood of bullocks or of lambs or of he-goats.
When ye come to appear before me, who has required this at your hand-to trample my courts?
Bring no more vain oblations. Incense is an abomination to me. New moon and sabbath, the calling of assemblies-I cannot bear iniquity and the solemn meeting.
Your new moons and your appointed feasts my soul hates. They are a trouble to me. I am weary of bearing them.
And when ye spread forth your hands, I will hide my eyes from you. Yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear; your hands are full of blood.
Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings from before my eyes. Cease to do evil.
Learn to do good. Seek justice, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow.
Come now, and let us reason together, says Jehovah, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow. Though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool.
If ye are willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land.
But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the sword, for the mouth of Jehovah has spoken it.
How the faithful city has become a harlot! She who was full of justice! Righteousness lodged in her, but now murderers.
Thy silver has become dross, thy wine mixed with water.
Thy rulers are rebellious, and companions of thieves. Everyone loves bribes, and follows after rewards. They judge not the fatherless, nor does the cause of the widow come to them.
Therefore says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, the Mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of my adversaries, and avenge me of my enemies.
And I will turn my hand upon thee, and thoroughly purge away thy dross, and will take away all thy tin.
And I will restore thy judges as at the first, and thy counselors as at the beginning. Afterward thou shall be called the city of righteousness, a faithful town.
Zion shall be redeemed with justice, and her converts with righteousness.
But the destruction of transgressors and sinners shall be together, and those who forsake Jehovah shall be consumed.
For they shall be ashamed of the oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens that ye have chosen.
For ye shall be as an oak whose leaf fades, and as a garden that has no water.
And the strong man shall be as flax, and his work as a spark. And they shall both burn together, and none shall quench them.

The word that Isaiah the son of Amoz saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem.
And it shall come to pass in the latter days, that the mountain of Jehovah's house shall be established on the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall flow to it.
And many peoples shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.
And he will judge between the nations, and will decide concerning many peoples, and they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, neither shall they learn war any more.
O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us walk in the light of Jehovah.
For thou have forsaken thy people the house of Jacob, because they are filled with things from the east, and are soothsayers like the Philistines. And they strike hands with the children of foreigners.
And their land is full of silver and gold, neither is there any end of their treasures. Their land is also full of horses, neither is there any end of their chariots.
Their land is also full of idols. They worship the work of their own hands, that which their own fingers have made,
and so the common man bows down, and the great man degrades himself. Therefore do not forgive them.
Enter into the rock, and hide thee in the dust, from before the terror of Jehovah, and from the glory of his majesty.
The lofty looks of man shall be brought low, and the haughtiness of men shall be bowed down, and Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
For there shall be a day of Jehovah of hosts upon all that is proud and haughty, and upon all that is lifted up, and it shall be brought low,
and upon all the cedars of Lebanon that are high and lifted up, and upon all the oaks of Bashan,
and upon all the high mountains, and upon all the hills that are lifted up,
and upon every lofty tower, and upon every fortified wall,
and upon all the ships of Tarshish, and upon all pleasant imagery.
And the loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be brought low, and Jehovah alone shall be exalted in that day.
And the idols shall utterly pass away.
And men shall go into the caves of the rocks, and into the holes of the earth, from before the terror of Jehovah, and from the glory of his majesty, when he arises to shake the earth mightily.
In that day men shall cast away their idols of silver, and their idols of gold, which have been made for them to worship, to the moles and to the bats,
to go into the caverns of the rocks, and into the clefts of the ragged rocks, from before the terror of Jehovah, and from the glory of his majesty, when he arises to shake the earth mightily.
Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for how is he to be accounted of?

For, behold, the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, takes away from Jerusalem and from Judah support and staff, the whole support of bread, and the whole support of water,
the mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the prophet, and the diviner, and the elder,
the captain of fifty, and the honorable man, and the counselor, and the expert craftsman, and the skilful enchanter.
And I will give sons to be their rulers, and babes shall rule over them.
And the people shall be oppressed, every one by another, and every one by his neighbor. The child shall behave himself proudly against the old man, and the base against the honorable.
When a man shall take hold of his brother in the house of his father, saying, Thou have clothing, be thou our ruler, and let this ruin be under thy hand,
in that day he shall lift up his voice, saying, I will not be a healer, for in my house is neither bread nor clothing. Ye shall not make me ruler of the people.
For Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen, because their tongue and their doings are against Jehovah, to provoke the eyes of his glory.
The show of their countenance witnesses against them, and they declare their sin as Sodom; they do not hide it. Woe to their soul! For they have done evil to themselves.
Say ye of the righteous, that it is well, for they shall eat the fruit of their doings.
Woe to the wicked! It is ill with him, for what his hands have done shall be done to him.
As for my people, children are their oppressors, and women rule over them. O my people, those who lead thee cause thee to err, and destroy the way of thy paths.
Jehovah stands up to contend, and stands to judge the peoples.
Jehovah will enter into judgment with the elders of his people, and the rulers of it. It is ye who have eaten up the vineyard; the spoil of a poor man is in your houses.
What do ye mean that ye crush my people, and grind the face of the poor? says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
Moreover Jehovah said, Because the daughters of Zion are haughty, and walk with outstretched necks and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a tinkling with their feet,
therefore the Lord will smite with a scab the crown of the head of the daughters of Zion, and Jehovah will lay bare their secret parts.
In that day the Lord will take away the beauty of their anklets, and the hair nets, and the crescents,
the pendants, and the bracelets, and the mufflers,
the bonnets, and the ankle chains, and the sashes, and the perfume-boxes, and the amulets,
the rings, and the nose-jewels,
the festival robes, and the mantles, and the shawls, and the satchels,
the hand-mirrors, and the fine linen, and the turbans, and the veils.
And it shall come to pass, that instead of sweet spices there shall be rottenness, and instead of a girdle, a rope, and instead of well set hair, baldness, and instead of a robe, a girding of sackcloth, branding instead of beauty.
Thy men shall fall by the sword, and thy mighty in the war.
And her gates shall lament and mourn, and she shall be desolate and sit upon the ground.

And seven women shall take hold of one man in that day, saying, We will eat our own bread, and wear our own apparel. Only let us be called by thy name; take thou away our reproach.
In that day the branch of Jehovah shall be beautiful and glorious, and the fruit of the land shall be excellent and comely for those who have escaped from Israel.
And it shall come to pass, that he who is left in Zion, and he who remains in Jerusalem, shall be called holy, even everyone who is written among the living in Jerusalem,
when the Lord shall have washed away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall have purged the blood of Jerusalem from the midst of it, by the spirit of justice, and by the spirit of burning.
And Jehovah will create over the whole habitation of mount Zion, and over her assemblies, a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night, for over all the glory, a covering.
And there shall be a pavilion for a shade in the daytime from the heat, and for a refuge, and for a covert from storm and from rain.

Let me sing for my well-beloved a song of my beloved concerning his vineyard. My well-beloved had a vineyard in a very fruitful hill.
And he dug it, and gathered out the stones of it, and planted it with the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also hewed out a winepress in it. And he looked that it should bring forth grapes, and it brought forth wild grapes.
And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem and men of Judah, judge, I pray you, between me and my vineyard.
What could have been done more to my vineyard that I have not done in it? Why, when I looked that it should bring forth grapes, it brought forth wild grapes?
And now I will tell you what I will do to my vineyard. I will take away the hedge of it, and it shall be eaten up. I will break down the wall of it, and it shall be trodden down.
And I will lay it waste. It shall not be pruned nor hoed, but there shall come up briers and thorns. I will also command the clouds that they rain no rain upon it.
For the vineyard of Jehovah of hosts is the house of Israel, and the men of Judah his pleasant plant. And he looked for justice, but behold, oppression, for righteousness, but behold, a cry.
Woe to those who join house to house, who lay field to field, till there is no room, and ye be made to dwell alone in the midst of the land!
In my ears says Jehovah of hosts, of a truth many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without inhabitant.
For ten acres of vineyard shall yield one bath, and a homer of seed shall yield but an ephah.
Woe to those who rise up early in the morning, that they may follow strong drink, who tarry late into the night, till wine inflame them!
And the harp and the lute, the tambourine and the pipe, and wine, are in their feasts, but they do not regard the work of Jehovah, nor have they considered the operation of his hands.
Therefore my people have gone into captivity for lack of knowledge, and their honorable men are famished, and their multitude are parched with thirst.
Therefore Sheol has enlarged its desire, and opened its mouth without measure. And their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he who rejoices among them, descend into it.
And the common man is bowed down, and the great man is debased, and the eyes of the lofty are humbled,
but Jehovah of hosts is exalted in justice, and God the Holy One is sanctified in righteousness.
Then the lambs shall feed as in their pasture, and wanderers shall eat the waste places of the fat ones.
Woe to those who draw iniquity with cords of falsehood, and sin as it were with a cart rope,
who say, Let him make speed, let him hasten his work, that we may see it. And let the counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw near and come, that we may know it!
Woe to those who call evil good, and good evil, who put darkness for light, and light for darkness, who put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter!
Woe to those who are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight!
Woe to those who are mighty to drink wine, and men of strength to mingle strong drink,
who justify the wicked for rewards, and take away the justice of the righteous man from him!
Therefore as the tongue of fire devours the stubble, and as the dry grass sinks down in the flame, so their root shall be as rottenness, and their blossom shall go up as dust, because they have rejected the law of Jehovah of hosts, and despised the word of the Holy One of Israel.
Therefore the anger of Jehovah is kindled against his people, and he has stretched forth his hand against them, and has smitten them. And the mountains tremble, and their dead bodies are as refuse in the midst of the streets. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
And he will lift up an ensign to the nations from far, and will whistle for them from the end of the earth, and, behold, they shall come with speed swiftly.
None shall be weary nor stumble among them. None shall slumber nor sleep, nor shall the belt of their loins be loosed, nor the latchet of their shoes be broken,
whose arrows are sharp, and all their bows bent. Their horses' hoofs shall be accounted as flint, and their wheels as a whirlwind.
Their roaring shall be like a lioness. They shall roar like young lions. Yea, they shall roar, and lay hold of the prey, and carry it away safe, and there shall be none to deliver.
And they shall roar against them in that day like the roaring of the sea. And if a man looks to the land, behold, darkness and distress, and the light is darkened in the clouds of it.

In the year that king Uzziah died I saw the Lord sitting upon a throne, high and lifted up, and his train filled the temple.
Above him stood the seraphim. Each one had six wings, with two he covered his face, and with two he covered his feet, and with two he flew.
And one cried to another, and said, Holy, holy, holy, is Jehovah of hosts. The whole earth is full of his glory.
And the foundations of the thresholds shook at the voice of him who cried, and the house was filled with vapor.
Then I said, Woe is me! For I am undone, because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips. For my eyes have seen the King, Jehovah of hosts.
Then one of the seraphim flew to me, having a live coal in his hand, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar.
And he touched my mouth with it, and said, Lo, this has touched thy lips, and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin forgiven.
And I heard the voice of the Lord, saying, Whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then I said, Lo, send me.
And he said, Go, and tell this people, Hear ye indeed, but do not understand, and see ye indeed, but do not perceive.
Make the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and turn, and be healed.
Then I said, Lord, how long? And he answered, Until cities be waste without inhabitant, and houses without man, and the land become utterly waste,
and Jehovah has removed men far away, and the forsaken places be many in the midst of the land.
And if there be yet a tenth in it, it also shall in turn be eaten up. As a terebinth, and as an oak, whose stock remains when they are felled, so the holy seed is the stock of it.

And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of Uzziah, king of Judah, that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the son of Remaliah, king of Israel, went up to Jerusalem to war against it, but could not prevail against it.
And it was told the house of David, saying, Syria is allied with Ephraim. And his heart trembled, and the heart of his people, as the trees of the forest tremble with the wind.
Then Jehovah said to Isaiah, Go forth now to meet Ahaz, thou, and Shear-jashub thy son, at the end of the conduit of the upper pool, in the highway of the fuller's field.
And say to him, Take heed, and be quiet. Fear not, nor let thy heart be faint, because of these two tails of smoking firebrands, for the fierce anger of Rezin and Syria, and of the son of Remaliah.
Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah, have purposed evil against thee, saying,
Let us go up against Judah, and vex it, and let us make a breach in it for us, and set up a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeel,
It shall not stand, nor shall it come to pass.
For the head of Syria is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin. And within sixty-five years Ephraim shall be broken in pieces, so that is shall not be a people.
And the head of Ephraim is Samaria, and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be established.
And Jehovah spoke again to Ahaz, saying,
Ask thee a sign of Jehovah thy God, ask it either in the depth, or in the height above.
But Ahaz said, I will not ask, nor will I test Jehovah.
And he said, Hear ye now, O house of David. Is it a small thing for you to weary men, that ye will weary my God also?
Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel.
Butter and honey shall he eat, when he knows to refuse the evil, and choose the good.
For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the good, the land whose two kings thou abhor shall be forsaken.
Jehovah will bring upon thee, and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house, days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah-even the king of Assyria.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that Jehovah will whistle for the fly that is in the outermost part of the rivers of Egypt, and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria.
And they shall come, and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys, and in the clefts of the rocks, and upon all thorn-hedges, and upon all pastures.
In that day the Lord will shave with a razor what is hired in the parts beyond the River, even with the king of Assyria, the head and the hair of the feet, and it shall also consume the beard.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall keep alive a young cow and two sheep.
And it shall come to pass, that because of the abundance of milk which they shall give he shall eat butter. For everyone who is left in the midst of the land shall eat butter and honey.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that every place where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silver coins, shall be for briers and thorns.
Men shall come there with arrows and with bow, because all the land shall be briers and thorns.
And all the hills that were dug with the mattock, thou shall not come there for fear of briers and thorns, but it shall be for the sending forth of oxen, and for the treading of sheep.

And Jehovah said to me, Take thee a great tablet, and write upon it with the pen of a man, For Maher-shalal-hash-baz.
And I will take to me faithful witnesses to record, Uriah the priest, and Zechariah the son of Jeberechiah.
And I went to the prophetess, and she conceived, and bore a son. Then Jehovah said to me, Call his name Maher-shalal-hash-baz.
For before the child shall have knowledge to cry, My father, and, My mother, the riches of Damascus and the spoil of Samaria shall be carried away before the king of Assyria.
And Jehovah spoke to me yet again, saying,
Inasmuch as this people have refused the waters of Shiloah that go softly, and rejoice in Rezin and Remaliah's son,
now therefore, behold, the Lord brings up upon them the waters of the River, strong and many, even the king of Assyria and all his glory. And it shall come up over all its channels, and go over all its banks,
and it shall sweep onward into Judah. It shall overflow and pass through; it shall reach even to the neck. And the stretching out of its wings shall fill the breadth of thy land, O Immanuel.
Make an uproar, O ye peoples, and be broken in pieces. And give ear, all ye of far countries. Gird yourselves, and be broken in pieces. Gird yourselves, and be broken in pieces.
Take counsel together, and it shall be brought to nothing. Speak the word, and it shall not stand, for God is with us.
For Jehovah spoke thus to me with a strong hand, and instructed me not to walk in the way of this people, saying,
Say ye not, A conspiracy, concerning all of which this people shall say, A conspiracy, nor fear ye their fear, nor be in dread of it.
Jehovah of hosts, him ye shall sanctify, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread.
And he shall be for a sanctuary, but for a stone of stumbling and for a rock of offense to both the houses of Israel, for a net and for a snare to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And many shall stumble on it, and fall, and be broken, and be snared, and be taken.
Bind thou up the testimony. Seal the law among my disciples.
And I will wait for Jehovah, who hides his face from the house of Jacob, and I will be a man who has trusted in him.
Behold, I and the children whom Jehovah has given me are for signs and for wonders in Israel from Jehovah of hosts, who dwells in mount Zion.
And when they shall say to you, Seek for those who have familiar spirits and for the wizards, who chirp and who mutter, should not a people seek for their God? On behalf of the living seek to the dead?
Seek to the law and to the testimony! If they speak not according to this word, surely there is no morning for them.
And they shall pass through it, greatly distressed and hungry. And it shall come to pass that, when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse by their king and by their God, and turn their faces upward.
And they shall look to the earth, and, behold, distress and darkness, the gloom of anguish, and into thick darkness to be driven away.

But there shall be no gloom to her who was in anguish. In the former time he brought into contempt the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, but in the latter time he has made it glorious, by the way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles.
The people who walked in darkness have seen a great light. Those who dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, upon them the light has shone.
Thou have multiplied the nation. Thou have increased their joy. They joy before thee according to the joy in harvest, as men rejoice when they divide the spoil.
For the yoke of his burden, and the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor, thou have broken as in the day of Midian.
For all the armor of the armed man in the tumult, and the garments rolled in blood, shall be for burning, for fuel of fire.
For to us a child is born, to us a son is given. And the government shall be upon his shoulder. And his name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, Mighty God, Father of Eternity, Prince of Peace.
Of the increase of his government and of peace there shall be no end, upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom, to establish it, and to uphold it with justice and with righteousness from henceforth even forever. The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will perform this.
The Lord sent a word into Jacob, and it has lighted upon Israel.
And all the people shall know, even Ephraim and the inhabitant of Samaria, who say in pride and in arrogance of heart,
The bricks are fallen, but we will build with hewn stone, the sycamores are cut down, but we will put cedars in their place.
Therefore Jehovah will set up on high against him the adversaries of Rezin, and will stir up his enemies,
the Syrians in front, and the Philistines behind, and they shall devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
Yet the people have not turned to him who smote them, nor have they sought Jehovah of hosts.
Therefore Jehovah will cut off from Israel head and tail, palm-branch and rush, in one day.
The elder and the honorable man, he is the head. And the prophet who teaches lies, he is the tail.
For those who lead this people cause them to err, and those who are led by them are destroyed.
Therefore the Lord will not rejoice over their young men, nor will he have compassion on their fatherless and widows. For everyone is profane and an evildoer, and every mouth speaks folly. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
For wickedness burns as the fire. It devours the briers and thorns. Yea, it kindles in the thickets of the forest, and they roll upward in a column of smoke.
Through the wrath of Jehovah of hosts is the land burnt up, and the people are as the fuel of fire; no man spares his brother.
And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry. And he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied. They shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm-
Manasseh, Ephraim, and Ephraim, Manasseh, and together they shall be against Judah. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.

Woe to those who decree unrighteous decrees, and to the writers who write perverseness,
to turn aside the needy from justice, and to rob the poor of my people of their right, that widows may be their spoil, and that they may make the fatherless their prey!
And what will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the desolation which shall come from far? To whom will ye flee for help? And where will ye leave your glory?
They shall only bow down under the prisoners, and shall fall under the slain. For all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still.
Ho, Assyrian, the rod of my anger, the staff in whose hand is my indignation!
I will send him against a profane nation, and against the people of my wrath. I will give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets.
However he does not so reason, nor does his heart so think, but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off nations not a few.
For he says, Are not my rulers all of them kings?
Is not Calno as Carchemish? Is not Hamath as Arpad? Is not Samaria as Damascus?
As my hand has found the kingdoms of the idols, whose graven images excelled those of Jerusalem and of Samaria,
shall I not, as I have done to Samaria and her idols, so do to Jerusalem and her idols?
Therefore it shall come to pass, that, when the Lord has performed his whole work upon mount Zion and on Jerusalem, I will punish the fruit of the arrogant heart of the king of Assyria, and the glory of his high looks.
For he has said, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my wisdom, for I have understanding. And I have removed the bounds of the peoples, and have robbed their treasures. And like a valiant man I have brought down those who sit on thrones.
And my hand has found as a nest the riches of the peoples. And like a gathering of eggs that are forsaken, I have gathered all the earth. And there was none that moved the wing, or that opened the mouth, or chirped.
Shall the axe boast itself against him who hews with it? Shall the saw magnify itself against him who wields it? As if a rod should wield those who lift it up, or as if a staff should lift up him who is not wood.
Therefore will the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, send among his fat ones, leanness, and under his glory there shall be kindled a burning like the burning of fire.
And the light of Israel will be for a fire, and his Holy One for a flame, and it will burn and devour his thorns and his briers in one day.
And he will consume the glory of his forest, and of his fruitful field, both soul and body. And it shall be as when a standard-bearer faints.
And the remnant of the trees of his forest shall be few, so that a child may write them.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the remnant of Israel, and those who are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more again lean upon him who smote them, but shall lean upon Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, in truth.
A remnant shall return, even the remnant of Jacob, to the mighty God.
For though thy people, Israel, be as the sand of the sea, a remnant of them shall return. A destruction is determined, overflowing with righteousness.
For a full end, and that determined, the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, will make in the midst of all the earth.
Therefore thus says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, O my people who dwell in Zion, be not afraid of the Assyrian, though he smites thee with the rod, and lifts up his staff against thee, according to the manner of Egypt.
For yet a very little while, and the indignation shall be accomplished, and my anger is to his destruction.
And Jehovah of hosts will stir up against him a scourge as in the slaughter of Midian at the rock of Oreb. And his rod will be over the sea, and he will lift it up according to the manner of Egypt.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that his burden shall depart from off thy shoulder, and his yoke from off thy neck, and the yoke shall be destroyed because of fatness.
He has come to Aiath. He has passed through Migron. At Michmash he lays up his baggage.
They have gone over the pass. They have taken up their lodging at Geba. Ramah trembles. Gibeah of Saul has fled.
Cry aloud with thy voice, O daughter of Gallim! Hearken, O Laishah! O thou poor Anathoth!
Madmenah is a fugitive. The inhabitants of Gebim flee for safety.
This very day he shall halt at Nob. He shakes his hand at the mount of the daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem.
Behold, the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, will lop off the boughs with terror. And the high of stature shall be hewn down, and the lofty shall be brought low.
And he will cut down the thickets of the forest with iron, and Lebanon shall fall by a mighty one.

And there shall come forth a shoot out of the stock of Jesse. And a branch out of his roots shall bear fruit.
And the Spirit of Jehovah shall rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of Jehovah.
And his delight shall be in the fear of Jehovah. And he shall not judge according to the sight of his eyes, nor decide according to the hearing of his ears,
but with righteousness he shall judge the poor, and decide with equity for the meek of the earth. And he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips he shall kill the wicked.
And righteousness shall be the belt of his waist, and faithfulness the belt of his loins.
And the wolf shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie down with the kid, and the calf and the young lion and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them.
And the cow and the bear shall feed; their young ones shall lie down together. And the lion shall eat straw like the ox.
And the sucking child shall play on the hole of the asp, and the weaned child shall put his hand on the adder's den.
They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of Jehovah as the waters cover the sea.
And in that day there shall be a root of Jesse, and he who arises to rule over the Gentiles. In him shall the Gentiles hope, and his resting-place shall be glorious.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the Lord will set his hand again the second time to recover the remnant of his people, who shall remain, from Assyria, and from Egypt, and from Pathros, and from Cush, and from Elam, and from Shinar, and from Hamath, and from the islands of the sea.
And he will set up an ensign for the nations, and will assemble the outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the four corners of the earth.
Also the envy of Ephraim shall depart, and those who vex Judah shall be cut off. Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex Ephraim.
And they shall fly down upon the shoulder of the Philistines on the west. Together they shall despoil the sons of the east. They shall put forth their hand upon Edom and Moab, and the sons of Ammon shall obey them.
And Jehovah will utterly destroy the tongue of the Egyptian sea. And with his scorching wind he will wave his hand over the River, and will smite it into seven streams, and cause men to march over dry shod.
And there shall be a highway for the remnant of his people, who shall remain, from Assyria, like as there was for Israel in the day that he came up out of the land of Egypt.

And in that day thou shall say, I will give thanks to thee, O Jehovah, for though thou were angry with me. Thine anger is turned away and thou comfort me.
Behold, God is my salvation. I will trust, and will not be afraid, for Jehovah, even Jehovah, is my strength and song, and he has become my salvation.
Therefore with joy ye shall draw water out of the wells of salvation.
And in that day ye shall say, Give thanks to Jehovah. Call upon his name. Declare his doings among the peoples. Make mention that his name is exalted.
Sing to Jehovah, for he has done excellent things. Let this be known in all the earth.
Cry aloud and shout, thou inhabitant of Zion, for great in the midst of thee is the Holy One of Israel.

The burden of Babylon, which Isaiah the son of Amoz saw.
Set ye up an ensign upon the bare mountain. Lift up the voice to them. Wave the hand, that they may go into the gates of the nobles.
I have commanded my consecrated ones, yea, I have called my mighty men for my anger, even my proudly exulting ones.
The noise of a multitude in the mountains, as of a great people! The noise of a tumult of the kingdoms of the nations gathered together! Jehovah of hosts is mustering the army for the battle.
They come from a far country, from the outermost part of heaven, even Jehovah, and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the whole land.
Wail ye, for the day of Jehovah is at hand. It shall come as destruction from the Almighty.
Therefore all hands shall be feeble, and every heart of man shall melt.
And they shall be dismayed. Pangs and sorrows shall take hold. They shall be in pain as a woman in travail. They shall look in amazement one at another, their faces, faces of flame.
Behold, the day of Jehovah comes, cruel, with wrath and fierce anger, to make the land a desolation, and to destroy the sinners thereof out of it.
For the stars of heaven and the constellations of it shall not give their light. The sun shall be darkened in its going forth, and the moon shall not cause its light to shine.
And I will punish the world for the evil, and the wicked for their iniquity. And I will cause the arrogance of the proud to cease, and will lay low the haughtiness of the terrible.
I will make a man more rare than fine gold, even a man than the pure gold of Ophir.
Therefore I will make the heavens to tremble, and the earth shall be shaken out of its place, in the wrath of Jehovah of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger.
And it shall come to pass, that as the chased roe, and as sheep that no man gathers, they shall turn every man to his own people, and shall flee every man to his own land.
Everyone who is found shall be thrust through, and everyone who is taken shall fall by the sword.
Their infants also shall be dashed in pieces before their eyes. Their houses shall be rifled, and their wives ravished.
Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, who shall not regard silver, and as for gold, they shall not delight in it.
And their bows shall dash the young men in pieces. And they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; their eye shall not spare children.
And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms, the beauty of the Chaldeans' pride, shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
It shall never be inhabited, nor shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation. Neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there, nor shall shepherds make their flocks to lie down there.
But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there, and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures. And ostriches shall dwell there, and wild goats shall dance there.
And wolves shall cry in their castles, and jackals in the pleasant palaces. And her time is near to come, and her days shall not be prolonged.

For Jehovah will have compassion on Jacob, and will yet choose Israel, and set them in their own land. And the sojourner shall join himself with them, and they shall cling to the house of Jacob.
And the peoples shall take them, and bring them to their place. And the house of Israel shall possess them in the land of Jehovah for servants and for handmaids. And they shall take them captive whose captives they were, and they shall rule over their oppressors.
And it shall come to pass in the day that Jehovah shall give thee rest from thy sorrow, and from thy trouble, and from the hard service in which thou were made to serve,
that thou shall take up this taunt against the king of Babylon, and say, How has the oppressor ceased, the golden city ceased!
Jehovah has broken the staff of the wicked, the scepter of the rulers,
who smote the peoples in wrath with a continual stroke, who ruled the nations in anger, with a persecution that none restrained.
The whole earth is at rest, and is quiet. They break forth into singing.
Yea, the fir trees rejoice at thee, and the cedars of Lebanon, saying, Since thou are laid low, no hewer has come up against us.
Sheol from beneath is moved for thee, to meet thee at thy coming. It stirs up the dead for thee, even all the chief ones of the earth. It has raised up from their thrones all the kings of the nations.
They shall all answer and say to thee, Have thou also become weak as we? Have thou become like us?
Thy pomp is brought down to Sheol, and the noise of thy viols. The worm is spread under thee, and worms cover thee.
How thou are fallen from heaven, O day-star, son of the morning! How thou are cut down to the ground, who laid the nations low!
And thou said in thy heart, I will ascend into heaven. I will exalt my throne above the stars of God, and I will sit upon the mount of congregation, in the outermost parts of the north.
I will ascend above the heights of the clouds. I will make myself like the Most High.
Yet thou shall be brought down to Sheol, to the utmost parts of the pit.
Those who see thee shall gaze at thee. They shall consider thee, saying, Is this the man who made the earth to tremble, who shook kingdoms,
who made the world as a wilderness, and overthrew the cities of it, who did not let loose his prisoners to their home?
All the kings of the nations, all of them, sleep in glory, each one in his own house.
But thou are cast forth away from thy sepulcher like an abominable branch, clothed with the slain, who are thrust through with the sword, who go down to the stones of the pit, as a dead body trodden under foot.
Thou shall not be joined with them in burial, because thou have destroyed thy land. Thou have slain thy people. The seed of evildoers shall not be named forever.
Prepare ye slaughter for his sons for the iniquity of their fathers, that they not rise up, and possess the earth, and fill the face of the world with cities.
And I will rise up against them, says Jehovah of hosts, and cut off from Babylon name and remnant, and son and son's son, says Jehovah.
I will also make it a possession for the porcupine, and pools of water. And I will sweep it with the broom of destruction, says Jehovah of hosts.
Jehovah of hosts has sworn, saying, Surely, as I have thought, so shall it come to pass, and as I have purposed, so shall it stand,
that I will break the Assyrian in my land, and tread him under foot upon my mountains. Then shall his yoke depart from off them, and his burden depart from off their shoulder.
This is the purpose that is purposed upon the whole earth, and this is the hand that is stretched out upon all the nations.
For Jehovah of hosts has purposed, and who shall annul it? And his hand is stretched out, and who shall turn it back?
In the year that king Ahaz died was this burden.
Rejoice not, O Philistia, all of thee, because the rod that smote thee is broken. For out of the serpent's root shall come forth an adder, and his fruit shall be a fiery flying serpent.
And the firstborn of the poor shall feed, and the needy shall lie down in safety. And I will kill thy root with famine, and thy remnant shall be slain.
Howl, O gate, cry, O city. Thou are melted away, O Philistia, all of thee. For there comes a smoke out of the north, and there is no straggler in his ranks.
What then shall a man answer the messengers of the nation? That Jehovah has founded Zion, and in her shall the afflicted of his people take refuge.

The burden of Moab. For in a night Ar of Moab is laid waste, and brought to nothing. For in a night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to nothing.
They have gone up to Bayith, and to Dibon, to the high places, to weep. Moab wails over Nebo, and over Medeba. On all their heads is baldness. Every beard is cut off.
In their streets they gird themselves with sackcloth. On their housetops, and in their broad places, everyone wails, weeping abundantly.
And Heshbon cries out, and Elealeh. Their voice is heard even to Jahaz. Therefore the armed men of Moab cry aloud. His soul trembles within him.
My heart cries out for Moab. Her nobles flee to Zoar, to Eglath-shelishi-yah. For they go up with weeping by the ascent of Luhith. For they raise up a cry of destruction in the way of Horonaim.
For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate, for the grass is withered away. The tender grass fails. There is no green thing.
Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid up, they shall carry away over the brook of the willows.
For the cry has gone round about the borders of Moab, the wailing of it to Eglaim, and the wailing of it to Beer-elim.
For the waters of Dimon are full of blood. For I will bring yet more upon Dimon, a lion upon those of Moab who escape, and upon the remnant of the land.

Send ye the lambs for the ruler of the land from Selah to the wilderness, to the mount of the daughter of Zion.
For it shall be that, as wandering birds, as a scattered nest, so shall the daughters of Moab be at the fords of the Arnon.
Give counsel, execute justice, make thy shade as the night in the midst of the noonday. Hide the outcasts. Do not betray the fugitive.
Let my outcasts dwell with thee. As for Moab, be thou a covert to him from the face of the destroyer. For the extortioner is brought to nothing. Destruction ceases. The oppressors are consumed out of the land.
And a throne shall be established in loving kindness, and he shall sit on it in truth, in the tent of David, judging, and seeking justice, and swift to do righteousness.
We have heard of the pride of Moab, that he is very proud, even of his arrogance, and his pride, and his wrath. His boastings are nothing.
Therefore Moab shall wail for Moab, everyone shall wail. Ye shall mourn for the raisin-cakes of Kir-hareseth, utterly stricken.
For the fields of Heshbon languish, and the vine of Sibmah. The lords of the nations have broken down the choice branches of it, which reached even to Jazer, which wandered into the wilderness. Its shoots were spread abroad. They passed over the sea.
Therefore I will weep with the weeping of Jazer for the vine of Sibmah. I will water thee with my tears, O Heshbon, and Elealeh. for upon thy summer fruits and upon thy harvest the battle shout has fallen.
And gladness is taken away, and joy out of the fruitful field. And in the vineyards there shall be no singing nor joyful noise. No treader shall tread out wine in the presses. I have made the vintage shout to cease.
Therefore my heart sounds like a harp for Moab, and my inward parts for Kir-heres.
And it shall come to pass, when Moab presents himself, when he wearies himself upon the high place, and shall come to his sanctuary to pray, that he shall not prevail.
This is the word that Jehovah spoke concerning Moab in time past.
But now Jehovah has spoken, saying, Within three years, as the years of a hireling, the glory of Moab shall be brought into contempt, with all his great multitude. And the remnant shall be very small and of no account.

The burden of Damascus. Behold, Damascus is taken away from being a city, and it shall be a ruinous heap.
The cities of Aroer are forsaken. They shall be for flocks, which shall lie down, and none shall make them afraid.
And the fortress shall cease from Ephraim, and the kingdom from Damascus. And the remnant of Syria, they shall be as the glory of the sons of Israel, says Jehovah of hosts.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the glory of Jacob shall be made thin, and the fatness of his flesh shall grow lean.
And it shall be as when the harvestman gathers the standing grain, and his arm reaps the ears. Yea, it shall be as when he gleans ears in the valley of Rephaim.
Yet there shall be gleanings left in it, as the shaking of an olive tree-two or three berries in the top of the uppermost bough, four or five in the outmost branches of a fruitful tree, says Jehovah, the God of Israel.
In that day men shall look to their maker, and their eyes shall have respect for the Holy One of Israel.
And they shall not look to the altars, the work of their hands, nor shall they have respect for that which their fingers have made, either the Asherim, or the sun-images.
In that day their strong cities shall be as the forsaken places in the woodland and on the mountain top, which were forsaken from before the sons of Israel, and it shall be a desolation.
For thou have forgotten the God of thy salvation, and have not been mindful of the rock of thy strength. Therefore thou plant pleasant plants, and set it with foreign slips.
In the day of thy planting thou hedge it in, and in the morning thou make thy seed to blossom. But the harvest flees away in the day of grief and of desperate sorrow.
Ah, the uproar of many peoples, who roar like the roaring of the seas, and the rushing of nations, that rush like the rushing of mighty waters!
The nations shall rush like the rushing of many waters, but he shall rebuke them. And they shall flee far off, and shall be chased as the chaff of the mountains before the wind, and like the whirling dust before the storm.
At eventide, behold, terror, and before the morning they are not. This is the portion of those who despoil us, and the lot of those who rob us.

Ah, the land of the rustling of wings, which is beyond the rivers of Ethiopia,
that sends ambassadors by the sea, even in vessels of papyrus upon the waters, saying, Go, ye swift messengers, to a nation tall and smooth, to a people fearful from their beginning onward, a nation that metes out and treads down, whose land the rivers divide!
All ye inhabitants of the world, and ye dwellers on the earth, when an ensign is lifted up on the mountains, see ye, and when the trumpet is blown, hear ye.
For thus Jehovah has said to me, I will be still, and I will behold in my dwelling-place, like clear heat in sunshine, like a cloud of dew in the heat of harvest.
For before the harvest, when the blossom is over, and the flower becomes a ripening grape, he will cut off the sprigs with pruning-hooks, and he will take away and cut down the spreading branches.
They shall be left together to the ravenous birds of the mountains, and to the beasts of the earth. And the ravenous birds shall summer upon them, and all the beasts of the earth shall winter upon them.
In that time a present shall be brought to Jehovah of hosts from a people tall and smooth, even from a people fearful from their beginning onward, a nation that metes out and treads down, whose land the rivers divide, to the place of the name of Jehovah of hosts, the mount Zion.

The burden of Egypt. Behold, Jehovah rides upon a swift cloud, and comes to Egypt. And the idols of Egypt shall tremble at his presence, and the heart of Egypt shall melt in the midst of it.
And I will stir up the Egyptians against the Egyptians, and they shall fight each one against his brother, and each one against his neighbor, city against city, kingdom against kingdom.
And the spirit of Egypt shall fail in the midst of it, and I will destroy the counsel of it. And they shall seek for the idols, and for the charmers, and for those who have familiar spirits, and for the wizards.
And I will give over the Egyptians into the hand of a cruel lord. And a fierce king shall rule over them, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
And the waters shall fail from the sea, and the river shall be wasted and become dry.
And the rivers shall become foul. The streams of Egypt shall be diminished and dried up. The reeds and flags shall wither away.
The meadows by the Nile, by the brink of the Nile, and all the sown fields of the Nile, shall become dry, be driven away, and be no more.
And the fishermen shall lament, and all those who cast a hook into the Nile shall mourn, and those who spread nets upon the waters shall languish.
Moreover those who work in combed flax, and those who weave white cloth, shall be confounded.
And the pillars of Egypt shall be broken in pieces. All those who work for hire shall be grieved in soul.
The rulers of Zoan are utterly foolish. The counsel of the wisest counselors of Pharaoh has become brutish. How will ye say to Pharaoh, I am the son of wise men, the son of ancient kings?
Where then are thy wise men? And let them tell thee now, and let them know what Jehovah of hosts has purposed concerning Egypt.
The rulers of Zoan have become fools. The rulers of Memphis are deceived. They have caused Egypt to go astray, the chief of her tribes.
Jehovah has mingled a spirit of perverseness in the midst of her, and they have caused Egypt to go astray in every work of it, as a drunken man staggers in his vomit.
Neither shall there be for Egypt any work, which head or tail, palm-branch or rush, may do.
In that day the Egyptians shall be like women, and they shall tremble and fear because of the shaking of the hand of Jehovah of hosts, which he shakes over them.
And the land of Judah shall become a terror to Egypt. Everyone to whom mention is made of it shall be afraid because of the purpose of Jehovah of hosts, which he purposes against it.
In that day there shall be five cities in the land of Egypt that speak the language of Canaan, and swear to Jehovah of hosts. One shall be called The city of destruction.
In that day shall there be an altar to Jehovah in the midst of the land of Egypt, and a pillar to Jehovah at the border of it.
And it shall be for a sign and for a witness to Jehovah of hosts in the land of Egypt. For they shall cry to Jehovah because of oppressors, and he will send them a savior, and a defender, and he will deliver them.
And Jehovah shall be known to Egypt, and the Egyptians shall know Jehovah in that day. Yea, they shall worship with sacrifice and oblation, and shall vow a vow to Jehovah, and shall perform it.
And Jehovah will smite Egypt, smiting and healing, and they shall return to Jehovah. And he will be entreated by them, and will heal them.
In that day there shall be a highway out of Egypt to Assyria. And the Assyrian shall come into Egypt, and the Egyptian into Assyria, and the Egyptians shall worship with the Assyrians.
In that day Israel shall be the third with Egypt and with Assyria, a blessing in the midst of the earth,
in that Jehovah of hosts has blessed them, saying, Blessed be Egypt my people, and Assyria the work of my hands, and Israel my inheritance.

In the year that Tartan came to Ashdod, when Sargon the king of Assyria sent him, and he fought against Ashdod and took it,
at that time Jehovah spoke by Isaiah the son of Amoz, saying, Go, and loose the sackcloth from off thy loins, and put thy shoe from off thy foot. And he did so, walking naked and barefoot.
And Jehovah said, Just as my servant Isaiah has walked naked and barefoot three years for a sign and a wonder concerning Egypt and concerning Ethiopia,
so shall the king of Assyria lead away the captives of Egypt, and the exiles of Ethiopia, young and old, naked and barefoot, and with buttocks uncovered, to the shame of Egypt.
And they shall be dismayed and confounded because of Ethiopia their confidence, and of Egypt their glory.
And the inhabitant of this coastland shall say in that day, Behold, such is our trust, where we fled for help to be delivered from the king of Assyria. And we, how shall we escape?

The burden of the wilderness of the sea. As whirlwinds in the South sweep through, it comes from the wilderness, from a terrible land.
A grievous vision is declared to me. The treacherous man deals treacherously, and the destroyer destroys. Go up, O Elam. Besiege, O Media, all the sighing of it I have made to cease.
Therefore my loins are filled with anguish. Pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman in travail. I am pained so that I cannot hear. I am dismayed so that I cannot see.
My heart flutters. Horror has frightened me. The twilight that I desired has been turned into trembling to me.
They prepare the table, they set the watch, they eat, they drink. Rise up, ye rulers, anoint the shield.
For thus has the Lord said to me, Go, set a watchman. Let him declare what he sees.
and when he sees a troop, horsemen in pairs, a troop of donkeys, a troop of camels, he shall hearken diligently with much heed.
And he cried out as a lion, O Lord, I stand continually upon the watchtower in the daytime, and am set in my ward whole nights,
and, behold, here comes a troop of men, horsemen in pairs. And he answered and said, Fallen, fallen is Babylon. And all the graven images of her gods are broken to the ground.
O my threshing, and the grain of my floor! That which I have heard from Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, I have declared to you.
The burden of Dumah. He calls to me out of Seir, Watchman, what of the night? Watchman, what of the night?
The watchman said, The morning comes, and also the night. If ye will inquire, inquire ye; turn ye back, come.
The burden upon Arabia. In the forest in Arabia ye shall lodge, O ye caravans of Dedanites.
To him who was thirsty they brought water. The inhabitants of the land of Tema met the fugitives with their bread.
For they fled away from the swords, from the drawn sword, and from the bent bow, and from the grievousness of war.
For thus the Lord has said to me, Within a year, according to the years of a hireling, all the glory of Kedar shall fail.
And the residue of the number of the archers, the mighty men of the sons of Kedar, shall be few. For Jehovah, the God of Israel, has spoken it.

The burden of the valley of vision. What troubles thee now, that thou have wholly gone up to the housetops?
O thou that are full of shoutings, a tumultuous city, a joyous town. Thy slain are not slain with the sword, nor are they dead in battle.
All thy rulers fled away together. They were bound by the archers. All who were found of thee were bound together; they fled afar off.
Therefore I said, Look away from me. I will weep bitterly. Labor not to comfort me for the destruction of the daughter of my people.
For it is a day of trouble, and of treading down, and of perplexity, from the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, in the valley of vision, a breaking down of the walls, and a crying to the mountains.
And Elam bore the quiver, with chariots of men and horsemen, and Kir uncovered the shield.
And it came to pass, that thy choicest valleys were full of chariots, and the horsemen set themselves in array at the gate.
And he took away the covering of Judah, and thou looked in that day to the armor in the house of the forest.
And ye saw the breaches of the city of David, that they were many. And to fortify the wall, ye gathered together the waters of the lower pool,
and ye numbered the houses of Jerusalem, and ye broke down the houses.
Ye also made a reservoir between the two walls for the water of the old pool. But ye did not look to him who had done this, nor had ye respect to him who purposed it long ago.
And in that day the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, called for weeping, and for mourning, and for baldness, and for girding with sackcloth.
And, behold, joy and gladness, slaying oxen and killing sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine. Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die.
And Jehovah of hosts revealed himself in my ears, Surely this iniquity shall not be forgiven you till ye die, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
Thus says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, Go, get thee to this treasurer, even to Shebna, who is over the house, and say,
What are thou doing here? And whom have thou here, that thou have hewed thee out here a sepulcher? Hewing him out a sepulcher on high, carving a habitation for himself in the rock!
Behold, Jehovah, like a strong man, will hurl thee away violently. Yea, he will wrap thee up closely.
He will surely wind thee round and round, tossing like a ball into a large country. There thou shall die, and there the chariots of thy glory shall be, thou shame of thy lord's house.
And I will thrust thee from thine office, and thou shall be pulled down from thy station.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will call my servant Eliakim the son of Hilkiah.
And I will clothe him with thy robe, and strengthen him with thy belt. And I will commit thy government into his hand, and he shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to the house of Judah.
And I will lay the key of the house of David upon his shoulder, and he shall open, and none shall shut, and he shall shut, and none shall open.
And I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, and he shall be for a throne of glory to his father's house.
And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his father's house, the offspring and the issue, every small vessel, from the cups even to all the flagons.
In that day, says Jehovah of hosts, the nail that was fastened in a sure place shall give way, and it shall be hewn down, and fall. And the burden that was upon it shall be cut off, for Jehovah has spoken it.

The burden of Tyre. Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, for it is laid waste, so that there is no house, no entering in. It is revealed to them from the land of Kittim.
Be still, ye inhabitants of the coast, thou whom the merchants of Sidon, who pass over the sea, have replenished.
And on great waters the seed of the Shihor, the harvest of the Nile, was her revenue, and she was the mart of nations.
Be thou ashamed, O Sidon, for the sea has spoken, the stronghold of the sea, saying, I have not travailed, nor brought forth, neither have I nourished young men, nor brought up virgins.
When the report comes to Egypt, they shall be greatly pained at the report of Tyre.
Pass ye over to Tarshish. Wail, ye inhabitants of the coast.
Is this your joyous city, whose antiquity is of ancient days, whose feet carried her afar off to sojourn?
Who has purposed this against Tyre, the bestower of crowns, whose merchants are rulers, whose traders are the honored of the earth?
Jehovah of hosts has purposed it, to stain the pride of all glory, to bring into contempt all the honorable of the earth.
Pass through thy land as the Nile, O daughter of Tarshish, there is no restraint any more.
He has stretched out his hand over the sea. He has shaken the kingdoms. Jehovah has given commandment concerning Canaan, to destroy the strongholds of it.
And he said, Thou shall no more rejoice, O thou oppressed virgin daughter of Sidon. Arise, pass over to Kittim, even there shall thou have no rest.
Behold, the land of the Chaldeans. This people once was not. The Assyrian founded it for those who dwell in the wilderness. They set up their towers. They raised up the palaces of it. Then they made it a ruin.
Howl, ye ships of Tarshish, for your stronghold is laid waste.
Take a harp, go about the city, thou harlot who has been forgotten. Make sweet melody, sing many songs, that thou may be remembered.
And it came to pass after the end of seventy years, that Jehovah examined Tyre, and she has repented of her gift, that she play the harlot with all the kingdoms of the world upon the face of the earth.
And her merchandise and her pay shall be holiness to Jehovah. It shall not be treasured nor laid up, for her merchandise shall be for those who dwell before Jehovah, to eat sufficiently, and for durable clothing.

Behold, Jehovah makes the earth empty, and makes it waste, and turns it upside down, and scatters abroad the inhabitants of it.
And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest, as with the servant, so with his master, as with the maid, so with her mistress, as with the buyer, so with the seller, as with the creditor, so with the debtor, as with the taker of interest, so with the giver of interest to him.
The earth shall be utterly emptied, and utterly laid waste, for Jehovah has spoken this word.
The earth mourns and fades away. The world languishes and fades away. The lofty people of the earth languish.
The earth also is polluted under the inhabitants of it, because they have transgressed the laws, violated the statutes, broken the everlasting covenant.
Therefore the curse has devoured the earth, and those who dwell in it are found guilty. Therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned, and few men left.
The new wine mourns. The vine languishes. All the merry-hearted do sigh.
The mirth of tambourine ceases. The noise of those who rejoice ends. The joy of the harp ceases.
They shall not drink wine with a song. Strong drink shall be bitter to those who drink it.
The waste city is broken down. Every house is shut up, that no man may come in.
There is a crying in the streets because of the wine. All joy is darkened. The mirth of the land is gone.
Desolation is left in the city, and the gate is smitten with destruction.
For thus shall it be in the midst of the earth among the peoples, as the shaking of an olive tree, as the gleanings when the vintage is done.
These shall lift up their voice. They shall shout. For the majesty of Jehovah they cry aloud from the sea.
Therefore glorify ye Jehovah in the east, even the name of Jehovah, the God of Israel, in the isles of the sea.
From the outermost part of the earth we have heard songs. Glory to the righteous. But I said, I pine away, I pine away. Woe is me! The treacherous have dealt treacherously, yea, the treacherous have dealt very treacherously.
Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the earth.
And it shall come to pass, that he who flees from the noise of the fear shall fall into the pit, and he who comes up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the snare. For the windows on high are opened, and the foundations of the earth tremble.
The earth is utterly broken. The earth is torn apart. The earth is shaken violently.
The earth shall stagger like a drunken man, and shall sway to and fro like a hammock. And the transgression of it shall be heavy upon it, and it shall fall, and not rise again.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that Jehovah will punish the host of the high ones on high, and the kings of the earth upon the earth.
And they shall be gathered together as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the prison. And after many days they shall be visited.
Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed, for Jehovah of hosts will reign in mount Zion and in Jerusalem. And glory shall be before his elders.

O Jehovah, thou are my God. I will exalt thee. I will praise thy name. For thou have done wonderful things, even counsels of old, in faithfulness and truth.
For thou have made of a city a heap, of a fortified city a ruin, a palace of strangers to be no city. It shall never be built.
Therefore a strong people shall glorify thee, a city of oppressive nations shall fear thee.
For thou have been a stronghold to a poor man, a stronghold to a needy man in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a shade from the heat, when the blast of the oppressors is as a storm against the wall.
As the heat in a dry place thou will bring down the noise of strangers, as the heat by the shade of a cloud, the song of the oppressors shall be brought low.
And in this mountain Jehovah of hosts will make to all peoples a feast of fat things, a feast of wines on the dregs, of fat things full of marrow, of wines on the dregs well refined.
And he will destroy on this mountain the face of the covering that covers all peoples, and the veil that is spread over all nations.
He will swallow up death in victory, and the lord Jehovah will wipe away tears from off all faces. And he will take away the reproach of his people from off all the earth. For Jehovah has spoken it.
And it shall be said in that day, Lo, this is our God. We have waited for him, and he will save us. This is Jehovah. We have waited for him. We will be glad and rejoice in his salvation.
For the hand of Jehovah will rest on this mountain. And Moab shall be trodden down in his place, even as straw is trodden down in the water of the dunghill.
And he shall spread forth his hands in the midst of it as he who swims spreads forth his hands to swim. But Jehovah will lay low his pride together with the craft of his hands.
And the high fortress of thy walls he has brought down, laid low, and brought to the ground, even to the dust.

We have a strong city. He will appoint salvation for walls and bulwarks.
Open ye the gates, that the righteous nation which keeps faith may enter in.
Thou will keep him in perfect peace, whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee.
Trust ye in Jehovah forever, for in Jehovah, even Jehovah, is an everlasting rock.
For he has brought down those who dwell on high. The lofty city, he lays it low. He lays it low even to the ground. He brings it even to the dust.
The foot shall tread it down, even the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy.
The way of the just is uprightness. Thou who are upright directs the path of the just.
Yea, in the way of thy judgments, O Jehovah, we have waited for thee, to thy name. Even to thy memorial, is the desire of our soul.
With my soul I have desired thee in the night. Yea, with my spirit within me I will seek thee earnestly. For when thy judgments are in the earth, the inhabitants of the world learn righteousness.
Let favor be shown to a wicked man, yet he will not learn righteousness. In the land of uprightness he will deal wrongfully, and will not behold the majesty of Jehovah.
Jehovah, thy hand is lifted up, yet they do not see. But they shall see thy zeal for the people, and be put to shame. Yea, fire shall devour thine adversaries.
Jehovah, thou will ordain peace for us, for thou have also wrought all our works for us.
O Jehovah our God, other lords besides thee have had dominion over us, but by thee only we will make mention of thy name.
Being dead, they shall not live. Being deceased, they shall not rise. Therefore thou have visited and destroyed them, and made all remembrance of them to perish.
Thou have increased the nation, O Jehovah, thou have increased the nation. Thou are glorified. Thou have enlarged all the borders of the land.
Jehovah, in trouble they have visited thee, they poured out a prayer when thy chastening was upon them.
As a woman with child, who draws near the time of her delivery, is in pain and cries out in her pangs, so we have been before thee, O Jehovah.
We have been with child. We have been in pain. We have as it were brought forth wind. We have not wrought any deliverance in the earth, nor have the inhabitants of the world fallen.
Thy dead shall live. My dead bodies shall arise. Awake and sing, ye who dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth shall cast forth the dead.
Come, my people, enter thou into thy chambers, and shut thy doors around thee. Hide thyself for a little moment until the indignation be passed over.
For, behold, Jehovah comes forth out of his place to punish the inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. The earth also shall disclose her blood, and shall no more cover her slain.

In that day Jehovah with his hard and great and strong sword will punish leviathan the swift serpent, and leviathan the crooked serpent, and he will kill the monster that is in the sea.
In that day is a vineyard of wine. Sing ye to it.
I Jehovah am its keeper, I will water it every moment. Lest any hurt it, I will guard it night and day.
Wrath is not in me. Would that the briers and thorns were against me in battle! I would march upon them. I would burn them together.
Or else let him take hold of my strength, that he may make peace with me. Yea, let him make peace with me.
In days to come Jacob shall take root; Israel shall blossom and bud. And they shall fill the face of the world with fruit.
Has he smitten them as he smote those who smote them? Or are they slain according to the slaughter of those who were slain by them?
In measure, in sending it forth, thou contend with it. He has removed with his rough blast in the day of the east wind.
that he makes all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are beaten apart, so that the Asherim and the sun-images shall rise no more.
For the fortified city is solitary, a habitation deserted and forsaken like the wilderness. There the calf shall feed, and there he shall lie down, and consume the branches of it.
When the boughs of it are withered, they shall be broken off. The women shall come, and set them on fire, for it is a people of no understanding. Therefore he who made them will not have compassion upon them, and he who formed them will show them no favor.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that Jehovah will beat off his fruit, from the flood of the River to the brook of Egypt. And ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye sons of Israel.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great trumpet shall be blown. And they shall come who were ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and those who were outcasts in the land of Egypt. And they shall worship Jehovah in the holy mountain at Jerusalem.

Woe to the crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim, and to the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley of those who are overcome with wine!
Behold, the Lord has a mighty and strong one. As a tempest of hail, a destroying storm, as a tempest of mighty waters overflowing, he will cast down to the earth with the hand.
The crown of pride of the drunkards of Ephraim shall be trodden under foot.
And the fading flower of his glorious beauty, which is on the head of the fat valley, shall be as the first-ripe fig before the summer, which, when he who looks upon it sees, while it is yet in his hand, he eats it up.
In that day Jehovah of hosts will become a crown of glory, and a diadem of beauty, to the residue of his people,
and a spirit of justice to him who sits in judgment, and strength to those who turn back the battle at the gate.
And even these reel with wine, and stagger with strong drink. The priest and the prophet reel with strong drink. They are swallowed up of wine. They stagger with strong drink; they err in vision; they stumble in judgment.
For all tables are full of vomit, filthiness, no place clean.
Whom will he teach knowledge? And whom will he make to understand the message? Those who are weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts?
For it is precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little, there a little.
No, but by men of strange lips and with another tongue he will speak to this people,
to whom he said, This is the rest. Give ye rest to him who is weary. And this is the refreshing. Yet they would not hear.
Therefore the word of Jehovah shall be to them precept upon precept, precept upon precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a little, there a little, that they may go, and fall backward, and be broken, and snared, and taken.
Therefore hear the word of Jehovah, ye scoffers, who rule this people that is in Jerusalem.
Because ye have said, We have made a covenant with death, and we are at agreement with Sheol. When the overflowing scourge shall pass through it shall not come to us, for we have made lies our refuge, and we have hid ourselves under falsehood.
Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner-stone, a sure foundation. He who believes in him shall, no, not be shamed.
And I will make justice the line, and righteousness the plummet. And the hail shall sweep away the refuge of lies, and the waters shall overflow the hiding-place.
And your covenant with death shall be annulled, and your agreement with Sheol shall not stand. When the overflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye shall be trodden down by it.
As often as it passes though, it shall take you. For morning by morning it shall pass through, by day and by night. And it shall be nothing but terror to understand the report.
For the bed is shorter than what a man can stretch himself on it, and the covering narrower than what he can wrap himself in it.
For Jehovah will rise up as in mount Perazim. He will be angry as in the valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work, his strange work, and bring to pass his act, his strange act.
Now therefore be ye not scoffers, lest your bonds be made strong. For I have heard a decree of destruction from the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, upon the whole earth.
Give ye ear, and hear my voice, hearken, and hear my speech.
Does he who plows to sow plow continually? Does he continually open and harrow his ground?
When he has leveled the face of it, does he not cast abroad the chick-peas, and scatter the cummin, and put in the wheat in rows, and the barley in the appointed place, and the spelt in the border of it?
For his God instructs him aright, and teaches him.
For the chick-peas are not threshed with a sharp instrument, nor is a cart wheel turned about upon the cummin, but the chick-peas are beaten out with a staff, and the cummin with a rod.
Bread grain is ground, for he will not be always threshing it. And though the wheel of his cart and his horses scatter it, he does not grind it.
This also comes forth from Jehovah of hosts, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in wisdom.

Ho Ariel, Ariel, the city where David encamped! Add ye year to year. Let the feasts come round.
Then I will distress Ariel, and there shall be mourning and lamentation, and she shall be to me as Ariel.
And I will encamp against thee round about, and will lay siege against thee with posted troops. And I will raise siege works against thee.
And thou shall be brought down, and shall speak out of the ground. And thy speech shall be low out of the dust, and thy voice shall be as of he who has a familiar spirit, out of the ground. And thy speech shall whisper out of the dust.
But the multitude of thy foes shall be like small dust, and the multitude of the terrible ones as chaff that passes away. Yea, it shall be in an instant suddenly.
She shall be visited by Jehovah of hosts with thunder, and with earthquake, and great noise, with whirlwind and tempest, and the flame of a devouring fire.
And the multitude of all the nations that fight against Ariel, even all that fight against her and her stronghold, and that distress her, shall be as a dream, a vision of the night.
And it shall be as when a hungry man dreams, and, behold, he eats. But he awakes, and his soul is empty. Or as when a thirsty man dreams, and, behold, he drinks. But he awakes, and, behold, he is faint, and his soul has appetite. So shall the multitude of all the nations be that fight against mount Zion.
Tarry ye and wonder, take your pleasure and be blind. They are drunken, but not with wine. They stagger, but not with strong drink.
For Jehovah has poured out upon you the spirit of deep sleep, and has closed your eyes. The prophets, and your heads, the seers, he has covered.
And all vision has become to you as the words of a book that is sealed, which men deliver to a man who is learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee. And he says, I cannot, for it is sealed.
And the book is delivered to him who is not learned, saying, Read this, I pray thee. And he says, I am not learned.
And the Lord said, Inasmuch as this people draw near me with their mouth, and honor me with their lips, but have removed their heart far from me, but in vain they worship me, teaching the commandments and doctrines of men.
Therefore, behold, I will proceed to do a marvelous work among this people, even a marvelous work and a wonder. I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and the understanding of their prudent men shall be hidden.
Woe to those who hide deep their counsel from Jehovah, and whose works are in the dark, and who say, Who sees us? and, Who knows us?
Ye turn things upside down! Shall the potter be esteemed as clay, that the thing made should say of him who made it, He did not make me, or the thing formed say of him who formed it, He has no understanding?
Is it not yet a very little while, and Lebanon shall be turned into a fruitful field, and the fruitful field shall be esteemed as a forest?
And in that day the deaf shall hear the words of the book, and the eyes of the blind shall see out of obscurity and out of darkness.
The meek also shall increase their joy in Jehovah, and the poor among men shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.
For the terrible one is brought to nothing, and the scoffer ceases. And all those who watch for iniquity are cut off,
who make a man an offender in his cause, and lay a snare for him who reproves in the gate, and turn aside the just with a thing of nothing.
Jacob shall not now be ashamed, nor shall his face now grow pale.
But when he sees his children, the work of my hands, in the midst of him, they shall sanctify my name. Yea, they shall sanctify the Holy One of Jacob, and shall stand in awe of the God of Israel.
They also who err in spirit shall come to understanding, and those who murmur shall receive instruction.

Woe to the rebellious sons, says Jehovah, who take counsel, but not of me, and who make a league, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin,
who set out to go down into Egypt, and have not asked at my mouth, to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh, and to take refuge in the shadow of Egypt!
Therefore the strength of Pharaoh shall be your shame, and the refuge in the shadow of Egypt your confusion.
For their rulers are at Zoan, and their ambassadors have come to Hanes.
They shall all be ashamed because of a people who cannot profit them, who are not a help nor profit, but a shame, and also a reproach.
The burden of the beasts of the South. Through the land of trouble and anguish, from where come the lioness and the lion, the viper and fiery flying serpent, they carry their riches upon the shoulders of young donkeys, and their treasures upon the humps of camels, to a people who shall not profit them.
For Egypt helps in vain, and to no purpose. Therefore I have called her Rahab who sits still.
Now go, write it before them on a tablet, and inscribe it on a scroll, that it may be for the time to come forever and ever.
For it is a rebellious people, lying sons, sons who will not hear the law of Jehovah,
who say to the seers, Do not see, and to the prophets, Do not prophesy to us right things. Speak to us smooth things. Prophesy deceits.
Get you out of the way. Turn aside out of the path. Cause the Holy One of Israel to cease from before us.
Therefore thus says the Holy One of Israel, Because ye despise this word, and trust in oppression and perverseness, and rely on it,
therefore this iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high wall, whose breaking comes suddenly in an instant.
And he shall break it as a potter's vessel is broken, breaking it in pieces without sparing, so that there shall not be found among the pieces of it a shard with which to take fire from the hearth, or to dip up water out of the cistern.
For thus said the lord Jehovah, the Holy One of Israel, Ye shall be saved in returning and rest. Your strength shall be in quietness and in confidence. And ye would not,
but ye said, No, for we will flee upon horses. Therefore ye shall flee. And ye said, We will ride upon the swift. Therefore those who pursue you shall be swift.
One thousand shall flee at the threat of one. Ye shall flee at the threat of five, till ye are left as a beacon upon the top of a mountain, and as an ensign on a hill.
And therefore Jehovah will wait, that he may be gracious to you. And therefore he will be exalted, that he may have mercy upon you, for Jehovah is a God of justice. Blessed are all those who wait for him.
For the people shall dwell in Zion at Jerusalem. Thou shall weep no more. He will surely be gracious to thee at the voice of thy cry. When he shall hear, he will answer thee.
And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity and the water of affliction, yet thy teachers shall not be hidden anymore, but thine eyes shall see thy teachers.
And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn to the left.
And ye shall defile the overlaying of thy graven images of silver, and the plating of thy molten images of gold. Thou shall cast them away as an unclean thing. Thou shall say to it, Get thee away.
And he will give the rain for thy seed, with which thou shall sow the ground, and bread of the increase of the ground, and it shall be fat and plenteous. In that day thy cattle shall feed in large pastures.
Likewise the oxen and the young donkeys that till the ground shall eat savory provender, which has been winnowed with the shovel and with the fork.
And there shall be upon every lofty mountain, and upon every high hill, brooks and streams of waters, in the day of the great slaughter, when the towers fall.
Moreover the light of the moon shall be as the light of the sun, and the light of the sun shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days, in the day that Jehovah binds up the hurt of his people, and heals the stroke of their wound.
Behold, the name of Jehovah comes from far, burning with his anger, and in thick rising smoke. His lips are full of indignation, and his tongue is as a devouring fire,
and his breath is as an overflowing stream that reaches even to the neck, to sift the nations with the sieve of destruction. And a bridle that causes to err shall be in the jaws of the peoples.
Ye shall have a song as in the night when a holy feast is kept, and gladness of heart, as he who goes with a pipe to come to the mountain of Jehovah, to the Rock of Israel.
And Jehovah will cause his glorious voice to be heard, and will show the coming down of his arm with the indignation of his anger, and the flame of a devouring fire, with a blast and tempest and hailstones.
For through the voice of Jehovah the Assyrian shall be dismayed. With his rod he will smite him.
And every stroke of the appointed staff, which Jehovah shall lay upon him, shall be with the sound of tambourine and harps. And he will fight with them in battles with the brandishing of his arm.
For a Topheth is prepared of old, yea, it is made ready for the king. He has made it deep and large. The pile of it is fire and much wood. The breath of Jehovah kindles it, like a stream of brimstone.

Woe to those who go down to Egypt for help, and rely on horses, and trust in chariots because they are many, and in horsemen because they are very strong, but they look not to the Holy One of Israel, nor seek Jehovah!
Yet he also is wise, and will bring evil, and will not call back his words, but will arise against the house of the evildoers, and against the help of those who work iniquity.
Now the Egyptians are men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit. And when Jehovah shall stretch out his hand, both he who helps shall stumble, and he who is helped shall fall, and they shall all be consumed together.
For thus says Jehovah to me, As the lion and the young lion growling over his prey, even if a multitude of shepherds are called forth against him, he will not be dismayed at their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of them, so Jehovah of hosts will come down to fight upon mount Zion, and upon the hill of it.
As birds hovering, so Jehovah of hosts will protect Jerusalem. He will protect and deliver. He will pass over and preserve.
Turn ye to him from whom ye have deeply revolted, O sons of Israel.
For in that day they shall cast away every man his idols of silver, and his idols of gold, which your own hands have made to you for a sin.
And the Assyrian shall fall by the sword, not of man, and the sword, not of men, shall devour him. But he shall flee from the sword, and his young men shall become subject to task work.
And his rock shall pass away because of terror, and his rulers shall be dismayed at the ensign, says Jehovah, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem.

Behold, a king shall reign in righteousness, and rulers shall rule in justice.
And a man shall be as a hiding-place from the wind, and a covert from the tempest, as streams of water in a dry place, as the shade of a great rock in a weary land.
And the eyes of those who see shall not be dim, and the ears of those who hear shall hearken.
And the heart of the rash shall understand knowledge, and the tongue of the stammerers shall be ready to speak plainly.
The fool shall no more be called noble, nor the churl said to be bountiful.
For the fool will speak folly, and his heart will work iniquity, to practice profaneness, and to utter error against Jehovah, to make empty the soul of the hungry, and to cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.
And the instruments of the churl are evil. He devises wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy speaks right.
But a noble man devises noble things, and in noble things he shall continue.
Rise up, ye women who are at ease. Hear my voice, ye careless daughters. Give ear to my speech.
For ye shall be troubled days beyond a year, ye careless women. For the vintage shall fail; the ingathering shall not come.
Tremble, ye women who are at ease. Be troubled, ye careless ones. Strip you, and make you bare, and gird sackcloth upon your loins.
They shall beat upon the breasts for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine.
Thorns and briers shall come up on the land of my people, yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city.
For the palace shall be forsaken. The populous city shall be deserted. The hill and the watch-tower shall be for dens forever, a joy of wild donkeys, a pasture of flocks,
until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high, and the wilderness becomes a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be esteemed as a forest.
Then justice shall dwell in the wilderness, and righteousness shall abide in the fruitful field.
And the work of righteousness shall be peace, and the effect of righteousness, quietness and confidence forever.
And my people shall abide in a peaceable habitation, and in safe dwellings, and in quiet resting-places.
But it shall hail in the downfall of the forest, and the city shall be utterly laid low.
Blessed are ye who sow beside all waters, who send forth the feet of the ox and the donkey.

Woe to thee who destroys, and thou were not destroyed, and deal treacherously, and they did not deal treacherously with thee! When thou have ceased to destroy, thou shall be destroyed, and when thou have made an end of dealing treacherously, they shall deal treacherously with thee.
O Jehovah, be gracious to us, we have waited for thee. Be thou our arm every morning, also our salvation in the time of trouble.
At the noise of the tumult the peoples have fled. At the lifting up of thyself the nations are scattered.
And your spoil shall be gathered as the caterpillar gathers. As locusts leap, men shall leap upon it.
Jehovah is exalted, for he dwells on high. He has filled Zion with justice and righteousness.
And there shall be stability in thy times, abundance of salvation, wisdom, and knowledge. The fear of Jehovah is thy treasure.
Behold, their valiant ones cry outside. The ambassadors of peace weep bitterly.
The highways lie waste. The wayfaring man ceases. The enemy has broken the covenant. He has despised the cities. He does not regard man.
The land mourns and languishes. Lebanon is confounded and withers away. Sharon is like a desert, and Bashan and Carmel shake off their leaves.
Now I will arise, says Jehovah. Now I will lift up myself. Now I will be exalted.
Ye shall conceive chaff. Ye shall bring forth stubble. Your breath is a fire that shall devour you.
And the peoples shall be as the burnings of lime, as thorns cut down that are burned in the fire.
Hear, ye who are far off, what I have done, and ye who are near, acknowledge my might.
The sinners in Zion are afraid. Trembling has seized the profane. Who among us can dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us can dwell with everlasting burnings?
He who walks righteously, and speaks uprightly. He who despises the gain of oppressions, who shakes away his hands from taking a bribe, who stops his ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from looking upon evil.
He shall dwell on high. His place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks. His bread shall be given. His waters shall be sure.
Thine eyes shall see the king in his beauty. They shall behold a land that reaches afar.
Thy heart shall muse on the terror. Where is he who counted? Where is he who weighed the tribute? Where is he who counted the towers?
Thou shall not see the fierce people, a people of a deep speech that thou cannot comprehend, of a strange tongue that thou cannot understand.
Look upon Zion, the city of our solemnities. Thine eyes shall see Jerusalem a quiet habitation, a tent that shall not be removed. The stakes of which shall never be plucked up, nor shall any of the cords of it be broken.
But Jehovah will be with us there in majesty. A place of broad rivers and streams, in which shall go no galley with oars, nor shall a gallant ship pass thereby.
For Jehovah is our judge. Jehovah is our lawgiver. Jehovah is our king, he will save us.
Thy tacklings are loosed. They could not strengthen the foot of their mast. They could not spread the sail. Then the prey of a great spoil was divided. The lame took the prey.
And the inhabitant shall not say, I am sick. The people who dwell in it shall be forgiven their iniquity.

Come near, ye nations, to hear. And hearken, ye peoples. Let the earth hear, and the fullness thereof, the world, and all things that come forth from it.
For Jehovah has indignation against all the nations, and wrath against all their host. He has utterly destroyed them. He has delivered them to the slaughter.
Their slain also shall be cast out. And the stench of their dead bodies shall come up, and the mountains shall be melted with their blood.
And all the host of heaven shall be dissolved, and the heavens shall be rolled together as a scroll. And all their host shall fade away as the leaf fades from off the vine, and as a fading leaf from the fig tree.
For my sword has drunk its fill in heaven. Behold, it shall come down upon Edom, and upon the people of my curse, to judgment.
The sword of Jehovah is filled with blood. It is made fat with fatness, with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of rams, for Jehovah has a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the land of Edom.
And the wild oxen shall come down with them, and the bullocks with the bulls. And their land shall be drunken with blood, and their dust made fat with fatness.
For Jehovah has a day of vengeance, a year of recompense for the cause of Zion.
And the streams of Edom shall be turned into pitch, and the dust of it into brimstone. And the land thereof shall become burning pitch.
It shall not be quenched night nor day. The smoke of it shall go up forever. From generation to generation it shall lie waste. None shall pass through it forever and ever.
But the pelican and the porcupine shall possess it. And the owl and the raven shall dwell in it. And he will stretch over it the line of confusion, and the plummet of emptiness.
They shall call the nobles of it to the kingdom, but none shall be there. And all its rulers shall be nothing.
And thorns shall come up in its palaces, nettles and thistles in the fortresses of it. And it shall be a habitation of jackals, a court for ostriches.
And the wild beasts of the desert shall meet with the wolves. And the wild goat shall cry to his fellow. Yea, the screech owl shall settle there, and shall find her a place of rest.
There the dart-snake shall make her nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shade. Yea, there the vultures shall be gathered, each one with her mate.
Seek ye out of the book of Jehovah, and read. No one of these shall be missing. None shall want her mate. For my mouth, it has commanded, and his Spirit, it has gathered them.
And he has cast the lot for them, and his hand has divided it to them by line. They shall possess it forever. From generation to generation they shall dwell therein.

The wilderness and the dry land shall be glad. And the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose.
It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing. The glory of Lebanon shall be given to it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon. They shall see the glory of Jehovah, the excellency of our God.
Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees.
Say to those who are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not. Behold, your God will come with vengeance, with the recompense of God. He will come and save you.
Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped.
Then the lame man shall leap as a hart, and the tongue of the mute shall sing. For waters in the wilderness shall break out, and streams in the desert.
And the glowing sand shall become a pool, and the thirsty ground springs of water. In the habitation of jackals, where they lay, shall be grass with reeds and rushes.
And a highway shall be there, and a way. And it shall be called The way of holiness. The unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for the redeemed, the wayfaring men. Yea fools shall not err in it.
No lion shall be there, nor shall any ravenous beast go up in it. They shall not be found there, but the redeemed shall walk there.
And the ransomed of Jehovah shall return, and come with singing to Zion. And everlasting joy shall be upon their heads. They shall obtain gladness and joy. And sorrow and sighing shall flee away.

Now it came to pass in the fourteenth year of king Hezekiah, that Sennacherib king of Assyria came up against all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them.
And the king of Assyria sent Rabshakeh from Lachish to Jerusalem to king Hezekiah with a great army. And he stood by the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's field.
Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah came forth to him, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder.
What confidence is this in which thou trust?
I say, thy counsel and strength for the war are but vain words. Now on whom do thou trust that thou have rebelled against me?
Behold, thou trust upon the staff of this bruised reed, even upon Egypt, on which if a man leans, it will go into his hand, and pierce it. So is Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust on him.
But if thou say to me, We trust in Jehovah our God. Is that not he whose high places and whose altars Hezekiah has taken away, and has said to Judah and to Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar?
Now therefore, I pray thee, give pledges to my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them.
How then can thou turn away the face of one captain of the least of my master's servants, and put thy trust on Egypt for chariots and for horsemen?
And have I now come up without Jehovah against this land to destroy it? Jehovah said to me, Go up against this land, and destroy it.
Then Eliakim and Shebna and Joah said to Rabshakeh, Speak, I pray thee, to thy servants in the Syrian language, for we understand it. And speak not to us in the Jews' language, in the ears of the people who are on the wall.
But Rabshakeh said, Has my master sent me to thy master, and to thee, to speak these words, and not to the men who sit upon the wall, to eat their own dung, and to drink their own urine with you?
Then Rabshakeh stood, and cried with a loud voice in the Jews' language, and said, Hear ye the words of the great king, the king of Assyria.
Thus says the king, Let not Hezekiah deceive you, for he will not be able to deliver you.
Neither let Hezekiah make you trust in Jehovah, saying, Jehovah will surely deliver us. This city shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Hearken not to Hezekiah. For thus says the king of Assyria, Make your peace with me, and come out to me, and eat ye everyone of his vine, and everyone of his fig tree, and drink ye everyone the waters of his own cistern,
until I come and take you away to a land like your own land, a land of grain and new wine, a land of bread and vineyards.
Beware lest Hezekiah persuade you, saying, Jehovah will deliver us. Has any of the gods of the nations delivered his land out of the hand of the king of Assyria?
Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? Where are the gods of Sepharvaim? And have they delivered Samaria out of my hand?
Who are they among all the gods of these countries that have delivered their country out of my hand, that Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?
But they held their peace, and answered him not a word. For the king's commandment was, saying, Answer him not.
Then Eliakim the son of Hilkiah came, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and Joah, the son of Asaph, the recorder, to Hezekiah with their clothes torn, and told him the words of Rabshakeh.

And it came to pass, when king Hezekiah heard it, that he tore his clothes, and covered himself with sackcloth, and went into the house of Jehovah.
And he sent Eliakim, who was over the household, and Shebna the scribe, and the elders of the priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz.
And they said to him, Thus says Hezekiah, This day is a day of trouble, and of rebuke, and of blasphemy, for the sons have come to the birth, and there is not strength to bring forth.
It may be Jehovah thy God will hear the words of Rabshakeh, whom the king of Assyria his master has sent to defy the living God, and will rebuke the words which Jehovah thy God has heard. Therefore lift up thy prayer for the remnant that is left.
So the servants of king Hezekiah came to Isaiah.
Be not afraid of the words that thou have heard, with which the servants of the king of Assyria have blasphemed me.
Behold, I will put a spirit in him, and he shall hear news, and shall return to his own land. And I will cause him to fall by the sword in his own land.
So Rabshakeh returned, and found the king of Assyria warring against Libnah, for he had heard that he was departed from Lachish.
And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, He has come out to fight against thee. And when he heard it, he sent messengers to Hezekiah, saying,
Thus shall ye speak to Hezekiah king of Judah, saying, Let not thy God in whom thou trust deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem shall not be given into the hand of the king of Assyria.
Behold, thou have heard what the kings of Assyria have done to all lands, by destroying them utterly. And shall thou be delivered?
Have the gods of the nations delivered them, which my fathers have destroyed, Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the sons of Eden who were in Telassar?
Where is the king of Hamath, and the king of Arpad, and the king of the city of Sepharvaim, of Hena, and Ivvah?
And Hezekiah received the letter from the hand of the messengers, and read it. And Hezekiah went up to the house of Jehovah, and spread it before Jehovah.
And Hezekiah prayed to Jehovah, saying,
O Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, who sit above the cherubim, thou are the God, even thou alone, of all the kingdoms of the earth. Thou have made heaven and earth.
Incline thine ear, O Jehovah, and hear. Open thine eyes, O Jehovah, and see, and hear all the words of Sennacherib, who has sent to defy the living God.
Of a truth, Jehovah, the kings of Assyria have laid waste all the countries, and their land,
and have cast their gods into the fire. For they were no gods, but the work of men's hands, wood and stone. Therefore they have destroyed them.
Now therefore, O Jehovah our God, save us from his hand, that all the kingdoms of the earth may know that thou are Jehovah, even thou only.
Then Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hezekiah, saying, Thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, Whereas thou have prayed to me against Sennacherib king of Assyria,
The virgin daughter of Zion has despised thee and laughed thee to scorn. The daughter of Jerusalem has shaken her head at thee.
Whom have thou defied and blasphemed? And against whom have thou exalted thy voice and lifted up thine eyes on high? Even against the Holy One of Israel.
By thy servants thou have defied the Lord, and have said, With the multitude of my chariots I have come up to the height of the mountains, to the innermost parts of Lebanon. And I will cut down the tall cedars of it, and the choice fir trees of it, and I will enter into its farthest height, the forest of its fruitful field.
I have dug and drunk water, and with the sole of my feet I will dry up all the rivers of Egypt.
Have thou not heard how I have done it long ago, and formed it of ancient times? Now I have brought it to pass, that it should be thine to lay waste fortified cities into ruinous heaps.
Therefore their inhabitants were of small power. They were dismayed and confounded. They were as the grass of the field, and as the green herb. As the grass on the housetops, and as a field of grain before it is grown up.
But I know thy sitting down, and thy going out, and thy coming in, and thy raging against me.
Because of thy raging against me, and because thine arrogance has come up into my ears, therefore I will put my hook in thy nose, and my bridle in thy lips, and I will turn thee back by the way by which thou came.
And this shall be the sign to thee. Ye shall eat this year that which grows of itself, and in the second year that which springs of the same, and in the third year sow ye, and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of it.
And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah shall again take root downward, and bear fruit upward.
For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a remnant, and out of mount Zion those who shall escape. The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will perform this.
Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning the king of Assyria, He shall not come to this city, nor shoot an arrow there. Neither shall he come before it with shield, nor cast up a mound against it.
By the way that he came, by the same he shall return, and he shall not come to this city, says Jehovah.
For I will defend this city to save it, for my own sake, and for my servant David's sake.
And the agent of Jehovah went forth, and smote in the camp of the Assyrians a hundred and eighty-five thousand. And when men arose early in the morning, behold, these were all dead bodies.
So Sennacherib king of Assyria departed, and went and returned, and dwelt at Nineveh.
And it came to pass, as he was worshiping in the house of Nisroch his god, that Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons smote him with the sword, and they escaped into the land of Ararat. And Esar-haddon his son reigned in his stead.

In those days Hezekiah was sick to death. And Isaiah the prophet the son of Amoz came to him, and said to him, Thus says Jehovah, Set thy house in order, for thou shall die, and not live.
Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall, and prayed to Jehovah,
and said, Remember now, O Jehovah, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And Hezekiah wept greatly.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Isaiah, saying,
Go, and say to Hezekiah, Thus says Jehovah, the God of David thy father. I have heard thy prayer. I have seen thy tears. Behold, I will add to thy days fifteen years.
And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of Assyria, and I will defend this city.
Behold, I will cause the shadow on the steps, which has gone down on the dial of Ahaz with the sun, to return backward ten steps. So the sun returned ten steps on the dial on which it had gone down.
I said, In the noontide of my days I shall go into the gates of Sheol. I am deprived of the residue of my years.
I said, I shall not see Jehovah, even Jehovah in the land of the living. I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world.
My dwelling is removed, and is carried away from me as a shepherd's tent. I have rolled up, like a weaver, my life. He will cut me off from the loom. From day even to night thou will make an end of me.
I quieted myself until morning. As a lion, so he breaks all my bones. From day even to night will thou make an end of me.
Like a swallow or a crane, so I chattered. I moaned as a dove. My eyes fail with looking upward. O Lord, I am oppressed, be thou my surety.
What shall I say? He has both spoken to me, and himself has done it. I shall go softly all my years because of the bitterness of my soul.
O Lord, by these things men live, and wholly therein is the life of my spirit. Therefore recover thou me, and make me to live.
Behold, for peace I had great bitterness. But thou have by love for my soul delivered it from the pit of corruption. For thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.
For Sheol cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee. Those who go down into the pit cannot hope for thy truth.
The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day. The father to the sons shall make known thy truth.
Jehovah is ready to save me. Therefore we will sing my songs with stringed instruments all the days of our life in the house of Jehovah.
Now Isaiah had said, Let them take a cake of figs, and lay it for a plaster upon the boil, and he shall recover.
Hezekiah also had said, What is the sign that I shall go up to the house of Jehovah?

At that time Merodach-baladan the son of Baladan, king of Babylon, sent letters and a present to Hezekiah, for he heard that he had been sick, and was recovered.
And Hezekiah was glad of them, and showed them the house of his precious things, the silver, and the gold, and the spices, and the precious oil, and all the house of his armor, and all that was found in his treasures. There was nothing in his house, nor in all his dominion, that Hezekiah did not show them.
Then Isaiah the prophet came to king Hezekiah, and said to him, What did these men say? And from where did they come to thee? And Hezekiah said, They have come from a far country to me, even from Babylon.
Then he said, What have they seen in thy house? And Hezekiah answered, They have seen all that is in my house. There is nothing among my treasures that I have not shown them.
Behold, the days are coming, when all that is in thy house, and that which thy fathers have laid up in store until this day, shall be carried to Babylon. Nothing shall be left, says Jehovah.
And of thy sons who shall issue from thee, whom thou shall beget, they shall take away, and they shall be eunuchs in the palace of the king of Babylon.
Then Hezekiah said to Isaiah, The word of Jehovah which thou have spoken is good. He said moreover, For there shall be peace and truth in my days.

Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry to her, that her warfare has been completed, that her iniquity is pardoned, that she has received of Jehovah's hand double for all her sins.
The voice of a man crying out in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of Jehovah, make straight in the desert a highway for our God.
Every valley shall be exalted, and every mountain and hill shall be made low. And the crooked shall become straight, and the rough places smooth.
And the glory of Jehovah shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together. For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken it.
The voice said, Cry. And he said, What shall I cry? All flesh is grass, and all the goodliness of it is as the flower of the field.
The grass withers, the flower fades, because the breath of Jehovah blows upon it. Surely the people is grass.
The grass withers, the flower fades, but the word of our God shall stand forever.
O thou who tell good news to Zion, get thee up on a high mountain. O thou who tell good news to Jerusalem, lift up thy voice with strength. Lift it up, be not afraid, say to the cities of Judah, Behold, your God!
Behold, the lord Jehovah will come as a mighty one, and his arm will rule for him. Behold, his reward is with him, and his recompense before him.
He will feed his flock like a shepherd. He will gather the lambs in his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and will gently lead those who have their young.
Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a balance?
Who has known the mind of Jehovah, or being his counselor has taught him?
With whom did he take counsel. And who instructed him, and taught him in the path of justice. And taught him knowledge, and showed to him the way of understanding?
Behold, the nations are as a drop of a bucket, and are accounted as the small dust of the balance. Behold, he takes up the isles as a very little thing.
And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts of it sufficient for a burnt offering.
All the nations are as nothing before him. They are accounted by him as less than nothing, and vanity.
To whom then will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye compare to him?
The image, a workman has cast it, and the goldsmith overlays it with gold, and casts for it silver chains.
He who is too impoverished for such an oblation chooses a tree that will not rot. He seeks for him a skilful workman to set up a graven image that shall not be moved.
Have ye not known? Have yet not heard? Has it not been told you from the beginning? Have ye not understood from the foundations of the earth?
It is he who sits above the circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as grasshoppers, who stretches out the heavens as a curtain, and spreads them out as a tent to dwell in,
who brings rulers to nothing, who makes the judges of the earth as vanity.
Yea, they have not been planted. Yea, they have not been sown. Yea, their stock has not taken root in the earth. Moreover he blows upon them, and they wither, and the whirlwind takes them away as stubble.
To whom then will ye liken me, that I should be equal to him? says the Holy One.
Lift up your eyes on high, and see who has created these, who brings out their host by number. He calls them all by name, by the greatness of his might. And because he is strong in power, not one is lacking.
Why do thou say, O Jacob, and speak, O Israel, My way is hid from Jehovah. And the justice due to me is passed away from my God?
Have thou not known? Have thou not heard? The everlasting God, Jehovah, the Creator of the ends of the earth, faints not, nor is weary. There is no searching of his understanding.
He gives power to the faint. And to him who has no might he increases strength.
Even the youths shall faint and be weary, and the young men shall utterly fall.
But those who wait for Jehovah shall renew their strength. They shall mount up with wings as eagles. They shall run, and not be weary. They shall walk, and not faint.

Keep silence before me, O islands, and let the peoples renew their strength. Let them come near, then let them speak. Let us come near together to judgment.
Who raised up the righteous man from the east, calls him to his foot, gives nations before him, and makes him rule over kings? He gives them as the dust to his sword, as the driven stubble to his bow.
He pursues them, and passes on safely, even by a way that he had not gone with his feet.
Who has wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I, Jehovah, the first, and with the last, I am he.
The isles have seen, and fear. The ends of the earth tremble, they draw near, and come.
They help every man his neighbor, and says to his brother, Be of good courage.
So the carpenter encourages the goldsmith, he who smoothes with the hammer, him who smites the anvil, saying of the soldering, It is good, and he fastens it with nails, that it should not be moved.
But thou, Israel, my servant, Jacob whom I have chosen, the seed of Abraham my friend,
thou whom I have taken hold of from the ends of the earth, and called from the corners thereof, and said to thee, Thou are my servant, I have chosen thee and not cast thee away.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee. Be not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will strengthen thee. Yea, I will help thee. Yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness.
Behold, all those who are incensed against thee shall be put to shame and confounded. Those who strive with thee shall be as nothing, and shall perish.
Thou shall seek them, and shall not find them, even those who contend with thee. Those who war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of naught.
For I, Jehovah thy God, will hold thy right hand, saying to thee, Fear not, I will help thee.
Fear not, thou worm Jacob, and ye men of Israel. I will help thee, says Jehovah, and thy Redeemer is the Holy One of Israel.
Behold, I have made thee as a new sharp threshing instrument having teeth. Thou shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shall make the hills as chaff.
Thou shall winnow them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the whirlwind shall scatter them. And thou shall rejoice in Jehovah. Thou shall glory in the Holy One of Israel.
The poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst. I, Jehovah, will answer them. I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them.
I will open rivers on the bare heights, and fountains in the midst of the valleys. I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of water.
I will put in the wilderness the cedar, the acacia, and the myrtle, and the oil tree. I will set in the desert the fir tree, the pine, and the box tree together,
that they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together, that the hand of Jehovah has done this, and the Holy One of Israel has created it.
Produce your case, says Jehovah. Bring forth your strong reasons, says the King of Jacob.
Let them bring forth, and declare to us what shall happen. Declare ye the former things, what they are, that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them, or show us things to come.
Declare the things that are to come hereafter, that we may know that ye are gods. Yea, do good, or do evil, that we may be dismayed, and behold it together.
Behold, ye are of nothing, and your work is of naught. An abomination is he who chooses you.
I have raised up him from the north, and he has come, him who calls upon my name from the rising of the sun. And he shall come upon rulers as upon mortar, and as the potter treads clay.
Who has declared it from the beginning, that we may know, and beforetime, that we may say, He is right? Yea, there is none who declares. Yea, there is none who shows. Yea, there is none who hears your words.
First to Zion. Behold, behold them, and I will give to Jerusalem him who brings good news.
And when I look, there is no man. Even among them there is no counselor, that, when I ask of them, can answer a word.
Behold, all of them, their works are vanity and nothing. Their molten images are wind and confusion.

Behold, my servant, whom I uphold, my chosen, in whom my soul delights. I have put my Spirit upon him, he will bring forth justice to the Gentiles.
He will not cry, nor lift up his voice, nor cause it to be heard in the street.
A bruised reed he will not break, and a dimly burning wick he will not quench, but he will bring forth justice in truth.
He will not fail nor be discouraged till he has set justice in the earth. And in his name Gentiles will hope.
Thus says God, Jehovah, he who created the heavens, and stretched them forth, he who spread abroad the earth and that which comes out of it, he who gives breath to the people upon it, and spirit to those who walk in it,
I, Jehovah, have called thee in righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles,
to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the dungeon, and those who sit in darkness out of the prison-house.
I am Jehovah. That is my name, and I will not give my glory to another, nor my praise to graven images.
Behold, the former things have come to pass, and I declare new things. Before they spring forth I tell you of them.
Sing to Jehovah a new song, and his praise from the end of the earth, ye who go down to the sea, and all that is therein, the isles, and the inhabitants thereof.
Let the wilderness and the cities of it lift up their voice, the villages that Kedar inhabits. Let the inhabitants of Sela sing. Let them shout from the top of the mountains.
Let them give glory to Jehovah, and declare his praise in the islands.
Jehovah will go forth as a mighty man. He will stir up his zeal like a man of war. He will cry, yea, he will shout aloud. He will do mightily against his enemies.
I have for a long time held my peace. I have been still, and refrained myself. Now I will cry out like a travailing woman. I will gasp and pant together.
I will lay waste mountains and hills, and dry up all their herbs. And I will make the rivers islands, and will dry up the pools.
And I will bring the blind by a way that they know not. I will lead them in paths that they know not. I will make darkness light before them, and crooked places straight. These things I will do, and I will not forsake them.
They shall be turned back, they shall be utterly put to shame, who trust in graven images, who say to molten images, Ye are our gods.
Hear, ye deaf, and look, ye blind, that ye may see.
Who is blind, but my servant, or deaf, as my messenger that I send? Who is blind as he who is at peace with me, and blind as Jehovah's servant?
Thou see many things, but thou do not observe. His ears are open, but he does not hear.
It pleased Jehovah, for his righteousness' sake, to magnify the law, and make it honorable.
But this is a people robbed and plundered. They are all of them snared in holes, and they are hid in prison-houses. They are for a prey, and none delivers, for a spoil, and none says, Restore.
Who is there among you that will give ear to this, that will hearken and hear for the time to come?
Who gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the robbers? Did not Jehovah? He against whom we have sinned, and in whose ways they would not walk, nor were they obedient to his law.
Therefore he poured upon him the fierceness of his anger, and the strength of battle. And it set him on fire round about, yet he knew not. And it burned him, yet he laid it not to heart.

Fear not, for I have redeemed thee. I have called thee by thy name, Thou are mine.
When thou pass through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee. When thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burned, nor shall the flame kindle upon thee.
For I am Jehovah thy God, the Holy One of Israel, thy Savior. I have given Egypt as thy ransom, Ethiopia and Seba in thy stead.
Since thou have been precious in my sight, and honorable, and I have loved thee, therefore I will give men in thy stead, and peoples instead of thy life.
Fear not, for I am with thee. I will bring thy seed from the east, and gather thee from the west.
I will say to the north, Give up, and to the south, Keep not back. Bring my sons from far, and my daughters from the end of the earth,
everyone who is called by my name, and whom I have created for my glory, whom I have formed, yea, whom I have made.
Bring forth the blind people who have eyes, and the deaf who have ears.
Let all the nations be gathered together, and let the peoples be assembled. Who among them can declare this, and show us former things? Let them bring their witnesses that they may be justified, or let them hear, and say, It is truth.
Ye are my witnesses, says Jehovah, and my servant whom I have chosen, that ye may know and believe me, and understand that I am he. Before me there was no God formed, nor shall there be after me.
I, even I, am Jehovah, and besides me there is no savior.
I have declared, and I have saved, and I have shown, and there was no strange god among you. Therefore ye are my witnesses, says Jehovah, and I am God.
Yea, since the day was I am he, and there is none that can deliver out of my hand. I will work, and who can hinder it?
For your sake I have sent to Babylon, and I will bring down all of them as fugitives, even the Chaldeans, in the ships of their rejoicing.
I am Jehovah, your Holy One, the Creator of Israel, your King.
Thus says Jehovah, who makes a way in the sea, and a path in the mighty waters,
Do not remember ye the former things, nor consider the things of old.
Behold, I will do a new thing. Now it shall spring forth. Shall ye not know it? I will even make a way in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert.
The beasts of the field shall honor me, the jackals and the ostriches, because I give waters in the wilderness, and rivers in the desert, to give drink to my people, my chosen,
the people whom I formed for myself, that they might set forth my praise.
Yet thou have not called upon me, O Jacob, but thou have been weary of me, O Israel.
Thou have not brought me from thy sheep for burnt offerings, nor have thou honored me with thy sacrifices. I have not burdened thee with offerings, nor wearied thee with frankincense.
Thou have bought me no sweet cane with money, nor have thou filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices. But thou have burdened me with thy sins. Thou have wearied me with thine iniquities.
I, even I, am he who blots out thy transgressions for my own sake, and I will not remember thy sins.
Put me in remembrance. Let us plead together. Set thou forth thy case that thou may be justified.
Thy first father sinned, and thy teachers have transgressed against me.
Therefore I will profane the rulers of the sanctuary, and I will make Jacob a curse, and Israel a reviling.

Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant, and Israel, whom I have chosen.
Fear not, O Jacob my servant, and thou, Jeshurun, whom I have chosen.
For I will pour water upon him who is thirsty, and streams upon the dry ground. I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring.
And they shall spring up among the grass, as willows by the watercourses.
One shall say, I am Jehovah's, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another shall subscribe with his hand to Jehovah, and surname himself by the name of Israel.
I am the first, and I am the last, and besides me there is no God.
And who, as I, shall call, and shall declare it, and set it in order for me, since I established the ancient people? And let them declare the things that are coming, and that shall come to pass.
Fear ye not, nor be afraid. Have I not declared to thee of old, and shown it? And ye are my witnesses. Is there a God besides me? Yea, there is no Rock. I know not any.
Those who fashion a graven image are all of them vanity. And the things that they delight in shall not profit. And their own witnesses see not, nor know, that they may be put to shame.
Who has fashioned a god, or molded an image that is profitable for nothing?
Behold, all his fellows shall be put to shame, and the workmen. They are of men. Let them all be gathered together. Let them stand up. They shall fear. They shall be put to shame together.
The smith makes an axe, and works in the coals, and fashions it with hammers, and works it with his strong arm. Yea, he is hungry, and his strength fails. He drinks no water, and is faint.
The carpenter stretches out a line. He marks it out with a pencil. He shapes it with planes. And he marks it out with the compasses, and shapes it after the figure of a man, according to the beauty of a man, to dwell in a house.
He hews down cedars for him, and takes the holm tree and the oak, and strengthens for himself one among the trees of the forest. He plants a fir tree, and the rain nourishes it.
Then it shall be for a man to burn. And he takes of it, and warms himself. Yea, he kindles it, and bakes bread. Yea, he makes a god, and worships it. He makes it a graven image, and falls down to it.
He burns part of it in the fire. With part of it he eats flesh. He roasts roast, and is satisfied. Yea, he warms himself, and says, Aha, I am warm, I have seen the fire.
And the residue of it he makes a god, even his graven image. He falls down to it and worships, and prays to it, and says, Deliver me, for thou are my god.
They do not know, nor do they consider. For he has shut their eyes, that they cannot see, and their hearts, that they cannot understand.
And none calls to mind, nor is there knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burned part of it in the fire. Yea, I have also baked bread upon the coals of it. I have roasted flesh and eaten it. And shall I make the residue of it an abomination? Shall I fall down to the stock of a tree?
He feeds on ashes. A deceived heart has turned him aside. And he cannot deliver his soul, nor say, Is there not a lie in my right hand?
Remember these things, O Jacob, and Israel, for thou are my servant. I have formed thee. Thou are my servant, O Israel, thou shall not be forgotten by me.
I have blotted out, as a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a cloud, thy sins. Return to me, for I have redeemed thee.
Sing, O ye heavens, for Jehovah has done it. Shout, ye lower parts of the earth. Break forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein. For Jehovah has redeemed Jacob, and will glorify himself in Israel.
I am Jehovah, who makes all things, who stretches forth the heavens alone, who spreads abroad the earth (who is with me?),
who frustrates the signs of the liars, and makes diviners mad, who turns wise men backward, and makes their knowledge foolish,
who confirms the word of his servant, and performs the counsel of his messengers, who says of Jerusalem, She shall be inhabited, and of the cities of Judah, They shall be built, and I will raise up the waste places of it,
who says to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers,
who says of Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying of Jerusalem, She shall be built, and of the temple, Thy foundation shall be laid.

Thus says Jehovah to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have held to subdue nations before him. And I will loose the loins of kings to open the doors before him. And the gates shall not be shut.
I will go before thee, and make the rough places smooth. I will break in pieces the doors of brass, and cut apart the bars of iron.
And I will give thee the treasures of darkness, and hidden riches of secret places, that thou may know that it is I, Jehovah, who call thee by thy name, even the God of Israel.
For Jacob my servant's sake, and Israel my chosen, I have called thee by thy name. I have surnamed thee, though thou have not known me.
I am Jehovah, and there is none else. Besides me there is no God. I will gird thee, though thou have not known me,
that they may know from the rising of the sun, and from the west, that there is none besides me. I am Jehovah, and there is none else.
I form the light, and create darkness. I make peace, and create evil. I am Jehovah who does all these things.
Distil, ye heavens, from above, and let the skies pour down righteousness. Let the earth open that it may bring forth salvation, and let it cause righteousness to spring up together. I, Jehovah, have created it.
Woe to him who strives with his maker, a potsherd among the potsherds of the earth! Shall the clay say to him that fashions it, What are thou making? or thy work, He has no hands?
Woe to him who says to a father, What are thou begetting? or to a woman, With what are thou travailing?
Ask me of the things that are to come concerning my sons. And command ye me concerning the work of my hands.
I have made the earth, and created man upon it. I, even my hands, have stretched out the heavens, and all their host I have commanded.
I have raised him up in righteousness, and I will make straight all his ways. He shall build my city, and he shall let my exiles go free, not for price nor reward, says Jehovah of hosts.
The labor of Egypt, and the merchandise of Ethiopia, and the Sabeans, men of stature, shall come over to thee, and they shall be thine. They shall go after thee. In chains they shall come over, and they shall fall down to thee. They shall make supplication to thee, saying, Surely God is in thee, and there is none else, no God.
Verily thou are a God who hides thyself, O God of Israel, the Savior.
They shall be put to shame, yea, confounded, all of them. They shall go into confusion together who are makers of idols.
But Israel shall be saved by Jehovah with an everlasting salvation. Ye shall not be put to shame nor confounded world without end.
I am Jehovah, and there is none else.
I have not spoken in secret, in a place of the land of darkness. I did not say to the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain. I, Jehovah, speak righteousness. I declare things that are right.
Assemble yourselves and come, draw near together, ye that are escaped of the nations. They have no knowledge that carry the wood of their graven image, and pray to a god that cannot save.
Declare ye, and bring it forth. Yea, let them take counsel together. Who has shown this from ancient time? Who has declared it of old? Have not I, Jehovah? And there is no other God besides me, a just God and a Savior. There is none besides me.
Look to me, and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth, for I am God, and there is none else.
By myself I have sworn, the word has gone forth from my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that to me every knee shall bow, every tongue will confess to God.
Only in Jehovah, it is said of me, is righteousness and strength. Even to him men shall come, and all those who were incensed against him shall be put to shame.
In Jehovah all the seed of Israel shall be justified, and shall glory.

Bel bows down, Nebo stoops, their idols are upon the beasts, and upon the cattle. The things that ye carried about are made a load, a burden to the weary beast.
They stoop, they bow down together. They could not deliver the burden, but themselves are gone into captivity.
Hearken to me, O house of Jacob, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, who have been borne by me from their birth, who have been carried from the womb.
And even to old age I am he, and even to hoar hairs I will carry you. I have made, and I will bear, yea, I will carry, and will deliver.
To whom will ye liken me, and make me equal, and compare me, that we may be alike?
Such as lavish gold out of the bag, and weigh silver in the balance, they hire a goldsmith, and he makes it a god. They fall down, yea, they worship.
They bear it upon the shoulder. They carry it, and set it in its place, and it stands. From its place it shall not remove. Yea, he may cry to it, yet it cannot answer, nor save him out of his trouble.
Remember this, and show yourselves men. Bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors.
Remember the former things of old, for I am God, and there is none else. I am God, and there is none like me,
declaring the end from the beginning, and from ancient times things that are not yet done, saying, My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my pleasure,
calling a ravenous bird from the east, the man of my counsel from a far country. Yea, I have spoken. I will also bring it to pass. I have purposed. I will also do it.
I bring near my righteousness. It shall not be far off. And my salvation shall not tarry, and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory.

Come down, and sit in the dust, O virgin daughter of Babylon. Sit on the ground without a throne, O daughter of the Chaldeans. For thou shall no more be called tender and delicate.
Take the millstones, and grind meal. Remove thy veil, strip off the train, uncover the leg, pass through the rivers.
Thy nakedness shall be uncovered, yea, thy shame shall be seen. I will take vengeance, and will spare no man.
Our Redeemer, Jehovah of hosts is his name, the Holy One of Israel.
Sit thou silent, and get thee into darkness, O daughter of the Chaldeans, for thou shall no more be called The mistress of kingdoms.
I was angry with my people. I profaned my inheritance, and gave them into thy hand. Thou showed them no mercy. Upon the aged thou have laid thy yoke very heavily.
And thou said, I shall be mistress forever, so that thou did not lay these things to thy heart, nor remembered the latter end of it.
Now therefore hear this, thou who are given to pleasures, who sit securely, who say in thy heart, I am, and there is none else besides me. I shall not sit as a widow, nor shall I know the loss of sons.
the loss of sons, and widowhood. In their full measure they shall come upon thee, in the multitude of thy sorceries, and the great abundance of thine enchantments.
For thou have trusted in thy wickedness. Thou have said, None sees me. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, it has perverted thee. And thou have said in thy heart, I am, and there is none else besides me.
Therefore evil shall come upon thee. Thou shall not know the dawning of it. And mischief shall fall upon thee. Thou shall not be able to put it away. And desolation shall come upon thee suddenly, which thou know not.
Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy sorceries, in which thou have labored from thy youth, if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail.
Thou are wearied in the multitude of thy counsels. Let now the astrologers, the star-gazers, the monthly prognosticators, stand up, and save thee from the things that shall come upon thee.
Behold, they shall be as stubble. The fire shall burn them. They shall not deliver themselves from the power of the flame. It shall not be a coal to warm at, nor a fire to sit before.
Thus shall be the things to thee, in which thou have labored. Those who have trafficked with thee from thy youth shall wander each one to his quarter. There shall be none to save thee.

Hear ye this, O house of Jacob, who are called by the name of Israel, and have come forth out of the waters of Judah, who swear by the name of Jehovah, and make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth, nor in righteousness
I have declared the former things from of old. Yea, they went forth out of my mouth, and I showed them. Suddenly I did them, and they came to pass.
Because I knew that thou are obstinate, and thy neck is an iron sinew, and thy brow brass,
therefore I have declared it to thee from of old. Before it came to pass I showed it to thee, lest thou should say, My idol has done them. And my graven image, and my molten image, has commanded them.
Thou have heard it, behold all this, and ye, will ye not declare it? I have shown thee new things from this time, even hidden things, which thou have not known.
They are created now, and not from of old. And thou have not heard them before this day, lest thou should say, Behold, I knew them.
Yea, thou heard not. Yea, thou knew not. Yea, from of old thine ear was not opened. For I knew that thou dealt very treacherously, and were called a transgressor from the womb.
For my name's sake I will defer my anger, and for my praise I will refrain for thee, that I not cut thee off.
Behold, I have refined thee, but not as silver. I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction.
For my own sake, for my own sake, I will do it. For how should my name be profaned? And I will not give my glory to another.
I am he. I am the first. I also am the last.
Yea, my hand has laid the foundation of the earth, and my right hand has spread out the heavens. When I call to them, they stand up together.
Who among them has declared these things? He whom Jehovah loves shall perform his pleasure on Babylon, and his arm, the Chaldeans.
I, even I, have spoken, yea, I have called him. I have brought him, and he shall make his way prosperous.
From the beginning I have not spoken in secret. From the time that it was, there I am. And now the lord Jehovah and his Spirit has sent me.
I am Jehovah thy God, who teaches thee to profit, who leads thee by the way that thou should go.
Oh that thou had hearkened to my commandments! Then thy peace would have been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the sea.
Thy seed also would have been as the sand, and the offspring of thy bowels like the grains of it. His name would not be cut off nor destroyed from before me.
Go ye forth from Babylon. Flee ye from the Chaldeans. With a voice of singing declare ye, tell this, utter it even to the end of the earth. Say ye, Jehovah has redeemed his servant Jacob.
And they did not thirst when he led them through the deserts. He caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them. He also split the rock, and the waters gushed out.
There is no peace, says Jehovah, to the wicked.

Listen, O isles, to me, and hearken, ye peoples from far. Jehovah has called me from the womb. From the bowels of my mother he has made mention of my name.
And he has made my mouth like a sharp sword. He has hid me in the shadow of his hand, and he has made me a polished shaft. He has kept me close in his quiver.
And he said to me, Thou are my servant, Israel, in whom I will be glorified.
But I said, I have labored in vain. I have spent my strength for nothing and vanity. Yet surely the justice due to me is with Jehovah, and my recompense with my God.
And now says Jehovah who formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, and that Israel be gathered to him (for I am honorable in the eyes of Jehovah, and my God has become my strength),
yea, he says, It is too light a thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation to the end of the earth.
Thus says Jehovah, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One, to him whom man despises, to him whom the nation abhors, to a servant of rulers. Kings shall see and arise, rulers, and they shall worship, because of Jehovah who is faithful, even the Holy One of Israel, who has chosen thee.
Thus says Jehovah, In an acceptable time I have heard thee, and in a day of salvation I have helped thee. And I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to raise up the land, to make them inherit the desolate heritages,
saying to those who are bound, Go forth; to those who are in darkness, Show yourselves. They shall feed in the ways, and their pasture shall be on all bare heights.
They shall not hunger nor thirst, neither shall the heat nor sun smite them. For he who has mercy on them will lead them. He will guide them even by springs of water.
And I will make all my mountains a way, and my highways shall be exalted.
Lo, these shall come from far, and, lo, these from the north and from the west, and these from the land of Sinim.
Sing, O heavens, and be joyful, O earth, and break forth into singing, O mountains. For Jehovah has comforted his people, and will have compassion upon his afflicted.
But Zion said, Jehovah has forsaken me, and the Lord has forgotten me.
Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb? Yea, these may forget, yet I will not forget thee.
Behold, I have engraved thee upon the palms of my hands. Thy walls are continually before me.
Thy sons make haste. Thy destroyers and those who made thee waste shall go forth from thee.
Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold. All these gather themselves together, and come to thee. As I live, says Jehovah, thou shall surely clothe thee with them all, as with an ornament, and gird thyself with them, like a bride.
For, as for thy waste and thy desolate places, and thy land that has been destroyed, surely now thou shall be too narrow for the inhabitants, and those who swallowed thee up shall be far away.
The sons of thy bereavement shall yet say in thine ears, The place is too narrow for me. Give a place to me that I may dwell.
Then thou shall say in thy heart, Who has begotten these for me, seeing I have been bereaved of my sons, and am solitary, an exile, and wandering to and fro? And who has brought up these? Behold, I was left alone, these, where were they?
Behold, I will lift up my hand to the nations, and set up my ensign to the peoples. And they shall bring thy sons in their bosom, and thy daughters shall be carried upon their shoulders.
And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing mothers. They shall bow down to thee with their faces to the earth, and lick the dust of thy feet. And thou shall know that I am Jehovah, and those who wait for me shall not be put to shame.
Shall the prey be taken from the mighty, or the lawful captives be delivered?
But thus says Jehovah, Even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the terrible shall be delivered. For I will contend with him who contends with thee, and I will save thy sons.
And I will feed those who oppress thee with their own flesh. And they shall be drunken with their own blood, as with sweet wine. And all flesh shall know that I, Jehovah, am thy Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.

Thus says Jehovah, Where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, with which I have put her away? Or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? Behold, for your iniquities ye were sold, and for your transgressions your mother was put away.
Why, when I came, was there no man? When I called, was there none to answer? Is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? Or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea. I make the rivers a wilderness. Their fish stink because there is no water, and die for thirst.
I clothe the heavens with blackness, and I make sackcloth their covering.
The lord Jehovah has given me the tongue of those who are taught, that I may know how to sustain with words him who is weary. He awakens morning by morning. He awakens my ear to hear as those who are taught.
The lord Jehovah has opened my ear, and I was not rebellious, nor turned away backward.
I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to those who plucked off the hair. I did not hide my face from shame and spitting.
For the lord Jehovah will help me. Therefore I have not been confounded. Therefore I have set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall not be put to shame.
He is near who justifies me. Who will contend with me? Let us stand up together. Who is my adversary? Let him come near to me.
Behold, the lord Jehovah will help me. Who is he who shall condemn me? Behold, all they shall grow old as a garment; the moth shall eat them up.
Who is among you that fears Jehovah, who obeys the voice of his servant? He who walks in darkness, and has no light, let him trust in the name of Jehovah, and rely upon his God.
Behold, all ye who kindle a fire, who gird yourselves about with firebrands, walk ye in the flame of your fire, and among the brands that ye have kindled. This ye shall have from my hand. Ye shall lie down in sorrow.

Hearken to me, ye who follow after righteousness, ye who seek Jehovah. Look to the rock from where ye were hewn, and to the hold of the pit from where ye were dug.
Look to Abraham your father, and to Sarah who bore you. For when he was but one I called him, and I blessed him, and made him many.
For Jehovah has comforted Zion. He has comforted all her waste places, and has made her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden of Jehovah. Joy and gladness shall be found therein, thanksgiving, and the voice of melody.
Attend to me, O my people, and give ear to me, O my nation. For a law shall go forth from me, and I will establish my justice for a light of the peoples.
My righteousness is near. My salvation has gone forth, and my arms shall judge the peoples. The isles shall wait for me, and on my arm they shall trust.
Lift up your eyes to the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath. For the heavens shall vanish away like smoke, and the earth shall grow old like a garment, and those who dwell in it shall die in like manner. But my salvation shall be forever, and my righteousness shall not be abolished.
Hearken to me, ye who know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law. Fear ye not the reproach of men, nor be ye dismayed at their revilings.
For the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool. But my righteousness shall be forever, and my salvation to all generations.
Awake, awake, put on strength, O arm of Jehovah. Awake, as in the days of old, the generations of ancient times. Is it not thou who cut Rahab in pieces, who pierced the monster?
Is it not thou who dried up the sea, the waters of the great deep, who made the depths of the sea a way for the redeemed to pass over?
And the ransomed of Jehovah shall return, and come with singing to Zion, and everlasting joy shall be upon their heads. They shall obtain gladness and joy, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away.
I, even I, am he who comforts you. Who are thou, that thou are afraid of man who shall die, and of the son of man who shall be made as grass,
and have forgotten Jehovah thy maker, who stretched forth the heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth, and fear continually all the day because of the fury of the oppressor, when he makes ready to destroy? And where is the fury of the oppressor?
The captive exile shall speedily be loosed, and he shall not die in the pit, nor shall his bread fail.
For I am Jehovah thy God, who stirs up the sea so that the waves of it roar. Jehovah of hosts is his name.
And I have put my words in thy mouth, and have covered thee in the shadow of my hand, that I may plant the heavens, and lay the foundations of the earth, and say to Zion, Thou are my people.
Awake, awake, stand up, O Jerusalem, who have drunk at the hand of Jehovah the cup of his wrath. Thou have drunk the bowl of the cup of staggering, and drained it.
There is none to guide her among all the sons whom she has brought forth, nor is there any who takes her by the hand among all the sons that she has brought up.
Desolation and destruction, and the famine and the sword. How shall I comfort thee?
Thy sons have fainted. They lie at the head of all the streets, as an antelope in a net. They are full of the wrath of Jehovah, the rebuke of thy God.
Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted, and drunken, but not with wine.
Behold, I have taken out of thy hand the cup of staggering, even the bowl of the cup of my wrath. Thou shall no more drink it again.
And I will put it into the hand of those who afflict thee, who have said to thy soul, Bow down, that we may go over, and thou have laid thy back as the ground, and as the street, to those who go over.

Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion. Put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem, the holy city. For henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean.
Shake thyself from the dust. Arise, sit up, O Jerusalem. Loose thyself from the bonds of thy neck, O captive daughter of Zion.
Ye were sold for nothing, and ye shall be redeemed without money.
For thus says the lord Jehovah, My people went down at the first into Egypt to sojourn there. And the Assyrian has oppressed them without cause.
Now therefore, what do I do here, says Jehovah, seeing that my people are taken away for nothing? Those who rule over them howl, says Jehovah, and because of you my name is continually blasphemed among the Gentiles.
Therefore my people shall know my name. Therefore they shall know in that day that I am he who speaks, Behold, it is I.
How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him who brings good news, who publishes peace, who brings good news of good, who publishes salvation, who says to Zion, Thy God reigns!
The voice of thy watchmen! They lift up the voice; they sing together. For they shall see eye to eye, when Jehovah returns to Zion.
Break forth into joy, sing together, ye waste places of Jerusalem, for Jehovah has comforted his people. He has redeemed Jerusalem.
Jehovah has made bare his holy arm in the eyes of all the nations, and all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
Depart ye, depart ye, go ye out from there. Touch no unclean thing. Go ye out of the midst of her. Cleanse yourselves, ye who bear the vessels of Jehovah.
For ye shall not go out in haste, nor shall ye go by flight. For Jehovah will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your rearward.
Behold, my servant shall deal wisely. He shall be exalted and lifted up, and shall be very high.
Just as many were astonished at thee (his visage was so marred, more than any man, and his form more than the sons of men),
so shall he sprinkle many nations. Kings shall shut their mouths at him. For that which had not been told them they shall see, and that which they had not heard they shall understand.

Who has believed our report? And to whom has the arm of Jehovah been revealed?
For he grew up before him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground. He has no form nor comeliness. And when we see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him.
He was despised, and rejected by men, a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief. And as him from whom men hide their face he was despised, and we esteemed him not.
Surely he has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows. Yet we esteemed him stricken, smitten by God, and afflicted.
But he was wounded for our transgressions. He was bruised for our iniquities. The chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.
All we like sheep have gone astray. We have turned every one to his own way, and Jehovah has laid on him the iniquity of us all.
He was oppressed, yet when he was afflicted he opened not his mouth. As a lamb that is led to the slaughter, and as a sheep that is mute before its shearers, so he opened not his mouth.
In his humiliation his justice was taken away. And as for his generation, who considered that he was cut off out of the land of the living for the transgression of my people, to whom the stroke was due?
And they made his grave with the wicked, and with a rich man in his death. Although he had done no violence, nor was any deceit in his mouth.
Yet it pleased Jehovah to bruise him. He has put him to grief. When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed. He shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of Jehovah shall prosper in his hand.
He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied. By the knowledge of himself shall my righteous servant justify many, and he shall bear their iniquities.
Therefore I will divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he poured out his soul to death, and was numbered with the transgressors. Yet he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors.

Sing, O barren, thou who did not bear. Break forth into singing, and cry aloud, thou who did not travail with child. For more are the sons of the desolate than the sons of the married woman, says Jehovah.
Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them stretch forth the curtains of thy habitations. Spare not. Lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes.
For thou shall spread abroad on the right hand and on the left. And thy seed shall possess the nations, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited.
Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed. Neither be thou confounded, for thou shall not be put to shame. For thou shall forget the shame of thy youth. And the reproach of thy widowhood thou shall remember no more.
For thy maker is thy husband. Jehovah of hosts is his name. And the Holy One of Israel is thy Redeemer. He shall be called the God of the whole earth.
For Jehovah has called thee as a wife forsaken and grieved in spirit, even a wife of youth when she is cast off, says thy God.
For a small moment I have forsaken thee, but with great mercies I will gather thee.
In overflowing wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment, but with everlasting loving kindness I will have mercy on thee, says Jehovah thy Redeemer.
For this is as the waters of Noah to me. For as I have sworn that the waters of Noah shall no more go over the earth, so I have sworn that I will not be angry with thee, nor rebuke thee.
For the mountains may depart, and the hills be removed, but my loving kindness shall not depart from thee, nor shall my covenant of peace be removed, says Jehovah who has mercy on thee.
O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will set thy stones in fair colors, and lay thy foundations with sapphires.
And I will make thy pinnacles of rubies, and thy gates of carbuncles, and all thy border of precious stones.
And all thy sons shall be taught of Jehovah, and great shall be the peace of thy sons.
Thou shall be established in righteousness. Thou shall be far from oppression, for thou shall not fear, and from terror, for it shall not come near thee.
Behold, they may gather together, but not by me. Whoever shall gather together against thee shall fall because of thee.
Behold, I have created the smith who blows the fire of coals, and brings forth a weapon for his work. And I have created the waster to destroy.
No weapon that is formed against thee shall prosper. And every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment thou shall condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of Jehovah, and their righteousness which is of me, says Jehovah.

Ho, everyone who thirsts, come ye to the waters. And he who has no money, come ye, buy, and eat. Yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price.
Why do ye spend money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which does not satisfy? Hearken diligently to me, and eat ye that which is good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness.
Incline your ear, and come to me. Hear, and your soul shall live. And I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the faithful holy things of David.
Behold, I have given him for a witness to the peoples, a leader and commander to the peoples.
Behold, thou shall call a nation that thou do not know. And a nation that does not know thee shall run to thee because of Jehovah thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel, for he has glorified thee.
Seek ye Jehovah while he may be found. Call ye upon him while he is near.
Let the wicked man forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts. And let him return to Jehovah, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, nor are your ways my ways, says Jehovah.
For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your thoughts.
For as the rain comes down and the snow from heaven, and returns not there, but waters the earth, and makes it bring forth and bud, and gives seed to the sower and bread to the eater,
so shall my word be that goes forth out of my mouth. It shall not return to me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please. And it shall prosper in the thing to which I sent it.
For ye shall go out with joy, and be led forth with peace. The mountains and the hills shall break forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the fields shall clap their hands.
Instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the brier shall come up the myrtle tree. And it shall be to Jehovah for a name, for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off.

Thus says Jehovah, Keep ye justice, and do righteousness. For my salvation is near to come, and my righteousness to be revealed.
Blessed is the man who does this, and the son of man who holds it fast, who keeps the sabbath from profaning it, and keeps his hand from doing any evil.
Neither let the foreigner, who has joined himself to Jehovah, speak, saying, Jehovah will surely separate me from his people, nor let the eunuch say, Behold, I am a dry tree.
To them I will give in my house and within my walls a memorial and a name better than of sons and of daughters. I will give them an everlasting name, that shall not be cut off.
Also the foreigners who join themselves to Jehovah, to minister to him, and to love the name of Jehovah, to be his servants, everyone who keeps the sabbath from profaning it, and holds fast my covenant,
even them I will bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer. Their burnt offerings and their sacrifices shall be accepted upon my altar, for my house shall be called a house of prayer for all peoples.
The lord Jehovah, who gathers the outcasts of Israel, says, Yet I will gather to him, besides his own who are gathered.
All ye beasts of the field, come to devour, yea, all ye beasts in the forest.
His watchmen are blind. They are all without knowledge. They are all mute dogs. They cannot bark, dreaming, lying down, loving to slumber.
Yea, the dogs are greedy; they can never have enough. And these are shepherds who cannot understand. They have all turned to their own way, each one to his gain, from every quarter.
Come ye, they say, I will fetch wine, and we will fill ourselves with strong drink. And tomorrow shall be as this day, great beyond measure.

The righteous man perishes, and no man lays it to heart. And merciful men are taken away; none considering that the righteous man is taken away from the evil.
He enters into peace. They rest in their beds, each one who walks in his uprightness.
But draw near here, ye sons of the sorceress, the seed of the adulterer and the harlot.
Against whom do ye sport yourselves, against whom ye make a wide mouth, and put out the tongue? Are ye not children of transgression, a seed of falsehood,
ye who inflame yourselves among the oaks, under every green tree, who kill the children in the valleys, under the clefts of the rocks?
Among the smooth stones of the valley is thy portion. They, they are thy lot, even to them thou have poured a drink offering; thou have offered an oblation. Shall I be appeased for these things?
Upon a high and lofty mountain thou have set thy bed. Thou also went up there to offer sacrifice.
And behind the doors and the posts thou have set up thy memorial. For thou have uncovered thyself to another than me, and have gone up. Thou have enlarged thy bed, and made thee a covenant with them. Thou loved their bed where thou saw it.
And thou went to the king with oil, and increased thy perfumes, and sent thine ambassadors far off, and debased thyself even to Sheol.
Thou were wearied with the length of thy way, yet thou did not say, It is in vain. Thou found a quickening of thy strength, therefore thou were not faint.
And of whom have thou been afraid and in fear, that thou lie, and have not remembered me, nor laid it to thy heart? Have I not held my peace even of long time, and thou do not fear me?
I will declare thy righteousness. And as for thy works, they shall not profit thee.
When thou cry, let those whom thou have gathered deliver thee. But the wind shall take them; a breath shall carry them all away. But he who takes refuge in me shall possess the land, and shall inherit my holy mountain.
And he will say, Cast ye up, cast ye up, prepare the way. Take up the stumbling-block out of the way of my people.
I dwell in the high and holy place, also with him who is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite.
For I will not contend forever, nor will I always be angry, for the spirit would faint before me, and the souls that I have made.
For the iniquity of his covetousness I was angry, and smote him. I hid my face and was angry, and he went on backsliding in the way of his heart.
I have seen his ways, and will heal him. I will lead him also, and restore comforts to him and to his mourners.
I create the fruit of the lips. Peace, peace, to him who is far off and to him who is near, says Jehovah, and I will heal him.
But the wicked are like the troubled sea, for it cannot rest, and its waters cast up mire and dirt.
There is no peace, says my God, to the wicked.

Cry aloud, spare not. Lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and declare to my people their transgression, and to the house of Jacob their sins.
Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways. As a nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the ordinance of their God, they ask of me righteous judgments; they delight to draw near to God.
Why have we fasted, they say, and thou see not? We have afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge. Behold, in the day of your fast ye find pleasure, and exact from all your laborers.
Behold, ye fast for strife and contention, and to smite with the fist of wickedness. Ye do not fast this day so as to make your voice to be heard on high.
Is such the fast that I have chosen, the day for a man to afflict his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a rush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? Will thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to Jehovah?
to loose the bonds of wickedness, to undo the bands of the yoke, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke?
Is it not to deal thy bread to a hungry man, and that thou bring the poor who are cast out to thy house, when thou see a naked man, that thou cover him, and that thou not hide thyself from thine own flesh?
Then thy light shall break forth as the morning, and thy healing shall spring forth speedily. And thy righteousness shall go before thee. The glory of Jehovah shall be thy rearward.
Then thou shall call, and Jehovah will answer, thou shall cry, and he will say, Here I am. If thou take the yoke away from the midst of thee, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking wickedly,
and if thou draw out thy soul to a hungry man, and satisfy an afflicted soul, then thy light shall rise in darkness, and thine obscurity be as the noonday.
And Jehovah will guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in dry places, and make strong thy bones. And thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water whose waters fail not.
And those who shall be of thee shall build the old waste places. Thou shall raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou shall be called The repairer of the breach, The restorer of paths to dwell in.
then thou shall delight thyself in Jehovah, and I will make thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and I will feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father. For the mouth of Jehovah has spoken it.

Behold, Jehovah's hand is not shortened, that it cannot save, nor his ear heavy, that it cannot hear.
But your iniquities have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you so that he will not hear.
For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity. Your lips have spoken lies. Your tongue mutters wickedness.
No man sues in righteousness, and no man pleads in truth. They trust in vanity, and speak lies. They conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity.
They hatch adders' eggs, and weave the spider's web. He who eats of their eggs dies, and that which is crushed breaks out into a viper.
Their webs shall not become garments, nor shall they cover themselves with their works. Their works are works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands.
Their feet run to evil, and they make haste to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity. Desolation and destruction are in their paths.
They do not know the way of peace, and there is no justice in their goings. They have made them crooked paths. Whoever goes in it does not know peace.
Therefore justice is far from us, nor does righteousness overtake us. We look for light, but behold, darkness, for brightness, but we walk in obscurity.
We grope for the wall like the blind. Yea, we grope as those who have no eyes. We stumble at noonday as in the twilight. We are as dead men in desolate places.
We all roar like bears, and moan greatly like doves. We look for justice, but there is none, for salvation, but it is far off from us.
transgressing and denying Jehovah, and turning away from following our God, speaking oppression and revolt, conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood.
And justice is turned away backward, and righteousness stands afar off. For truth has fallen in the street, and uprightness cannot enter.
Yea, truth is lacking, and he who departs from evil makes himself a prey. And Jehovah saw it, and it displeased him that there was no justice.
And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor. Therefore his own arm brought salvation to him. And his righteousness, it upheld him.
And he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and a helmet of salvation upon his head. And he put on garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a mantle.
According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay, wrath to his adversaries, recompense to his enemies. He will repay recompense to the islands.
So they shall fear the name of Jehovah from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. For he will come as a rushing stream, which the breath of Jehovah drives.
And he who redeems will come to Zion, and to those who turn from transgression in Jacob, says Jehovah.
My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, says Jehovah, from henceforth and forever.

Arise, shine, for thy light has come, and the glory of Jehovah has risen upon thee.
For, behold, darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the peoples. But Jehovah will arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.
And nations shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.
Lift up thine eyes round about, and see. They all gather themselves together. They come to thee. Thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be carried in the arms.
Then thou shall see and be radiant, and thy heart shall thrill and be enlarged, because the abundance of the sea shall be turned to thee. The wealth of the nations shall come to thee.
The multitude of camels shall cover thee. The dromedaries of Midian and Ephah, all those from Sheba shall come. They shall bring gold and frankincense, and shall proclaim the praises of Jehovah.
All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered together to thee. The rams of Nebaioth shall minister to thee. They shall come up with acceptance on my altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory.
Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows?
Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, for the name of Jehovah thy God, and for the Holy One of Israel, because he has glorified thee.
And foreigners shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister to thee. For in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favor I have had mercy on thee.
Thy gates also shall be open continually. They shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring to thee the wealth of the nations, and their kings led captive.
For that nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish. Yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.
The glory of Lebanon shall come to thee, the fir tree, the pine, and the box tree together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary. And I will make the place of my feet glorious.
And the sons of those who afflicted thee shall come bending to thee. And all those who despised thee shall bow themselves down at the soles of thy feet. And they shall call thee The city of Jehovah, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel.
Whereas thou have been forsaken and hated, so that no man passed through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations.
Thou shall also suck the milk of the nations, and shall suck the breast of kings. And thou shall know that I, Jehovah, am thy Savior, and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob.
For brass I will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron. I will also make thy officers peace, and thine overseers righteousness.
Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, desolation nor destruction within thy borders, but thou shall call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise.
The sun shall no more be thy light by day, nor for brightness shall the moon give light to thee, but Jehovah will be to thee an everlasting light, and thy God thy glory.
Thy sun shall no more go down, nor shall thy moon withdraw itself, for Jehovah will be thine everlasting light. And the days of thy mourning shall be ended.
Thy people also shall all be righteous. They shall inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.
The little one shall become a thousand, and the small one a strong nation. I, Jehovah, will hasten it in its time.

The Spirit of the lord Jehovah is upon me, because Jehovah has anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, and the opening of bonds to those who are bound,
to proclaim the acceptable year of Jehovah, and the day of vengeance of our God, to comfort all who mourn,
to appoint to those who mourn in Zion, to give to them a garland for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, that they may be called trees of righteousness, the planting of Jehovah, that he may be glorified.
And they shall build the old wastes. They shall raise up the former desolations, and they shall repair the waste cities, the desolations of many generations.
And strangers shall stand and feed your flocks, and foreigners shall be your plowmen and your vinedressers.
But ye shall be named the priests of Jehovah. Men shall call you the ministers of our God. Ye shall eat the wealth of the nations, and in their glory ye shall boast yourselves.
Instead of your shame ye shall have double, and instead of dishonor they shall rejoice in their portion. Therefore in their land they shall possess double. Everlasting joy shall be to them.
For I, Jehovah, love justice. I hate robbery with iniquity. And I will give them their recompense in truth. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them.
And their seed shall be known among the nations, and their offspring among the peoples. All who see them shall acknowledge them, that they are the seed which Jehovah has blessed.
I will greatly rejoice in Jehovah. My soul shall be joyful in my God, for he has clothed me with the garments of salvation. He has covered me with the robe of righteousness, as a bridegroom decks himself with a garland, and as a bride adorns herself with her jewels.
For as the earth brings forth its bud, and as the garden causes the things that are sown in it to spring forth, so the lord Jehovah will cause righteousness and praise to spring forth before all the nations.

For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until her righteousness goes forth as brightness, and her salvation as a lamp that burns.
And the nations shall see thy righteousness, and all kings thy glory. And thou shall be called by a new name, which the mouth of Jehovah shall name.
Thou shall also be a crown of beauty in the hand of Jehovah, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God.
Thou shall no more be termed Forsaken, nor shall thy land any more be termed Desolate. But thou shall be called Hephzi-bah, and thy land Beulah, for Jehovah delights in thee, and thy land shall be married.
For as a young man marries a virgin, so shall thy sons marry thee. And as the bridegroom rejoices over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.
I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem. They shall never keep silent day nor night. Ye who are Jehovah's reminders, take ye no rest,
and give him no rest, till he establishes, and till he makes Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
Jehovah has sworn by his right hand, and by the arm of his strength, Surely I will no more give thy grain to be food for thine enemies, and foreigners shall not drink thy new wine, for which thou have labored.
But those who have garnered it shall eat it, and praise Jehovah. And those who have gathered it shall drink it in the courts of my sanctuary.
Go through, go through the gates. Prepare ye the way of the people. Cast up, cast up the highway. Gather out the stones. Lift up an ensign for the peoples.
Behold, Jehovah has proclaimed to the end of the earth, Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation comes. Behold, his reward is with him, and his recompense before him.
And they shall call them The holy people, The redeemed of Jehovah. And thou shall be called Sought out, A city not forsaken.

Who is this who comes from Edom, with dyed garments from Bozrah, this who is glorious in his apparel, marching in the greatness of his strength? I who speak in righteousness, mighty to save.
Why are thou red in thine apparel, and thy garments like him who treads in the wine vat?
I have trodden the winepress alone, and of the peoples there was no man with me. Yea, I trod them in my anger, and trampled them in my wrath, and their lifeblood is sprinkled upon my garments, and I have stained all my raiment.
For the day of vengeance was in my heart, and the year of my redeemed has come.
And I looked, and there was none to help. And I wondered that there was none to uphold. Therefore my own arm brought salvation to me. And my wrath, it upheld me.
And I trod down the peoples in my anger, and made them drunk in my wrath, and I poured out their lifeblood on the earth.
I will make mention of the loving kindnesses of Jehovah, and the praises of Jehovah, according to all that Jehovah has bestowed on us, and the great goodness toward the house of Israel, which he has bestowed on them according to his mercies, and according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses.
For he said, Surely, they are my people, sons that will not deal falsely. So he was their Savior.
In all their affliction he was afflicted, and the agent of his presence saved them. In his love and in his pity he redeemed them. And he bore them, and carried them all the days of old.
But they rebelled, and grieved his holy Spirit. Therefore he was turned to be their enemy, and himself fought against them.
Then he remembered the days of old, Moses and his people, saying, Where is he who brought them up out of the sea with the shepherds of his flock? Where is he who put his holy Spirit in the midst of them,
who caused his glorious arm to go at the right hand of Moses, who divided the waters before them, to make himself an everlasting name,
who led them through the depths, as a horse in the wilderness, so that they stumbled not?
As the cattle that go down into the valley, the Spirit of Jehovah caused them to rest. So thou led thy people to make thyself a glorious name.
Look down from heaven, and behold from the habitation of thy holiness and of thy glory. Where are thy zeal and thy mighty acts? The yearning of thy heart and thy compassions are restrained toward me.
For thou are our Father, though Abraham knows us not, and Israel does not acknowledge us, thou, O Jehovah, are our Father, our Redeemer, from everlasting is thy name.
O Jehovah, why do thou make us to err from thy ways, and harden our heart from thy fear? Return for thy servants' sake, the tribes of thine inheritance.
Thy holy people possessed it but a little while. Our adversaries have trodden down thy sanctuary.
We have become as those over whom thou never bore rule, as those who were not called by thy name.

Oh that thou would rend the heavens, that thou would come down, that the mountains might quake at thy presence,
as when fire kindles the brushwood, and the fire causes the waters to boil, to make thy name known to thine adversaries, that the nations may tremble at thy presence!
When thou did fearful things which we did not look for, thou came down; the mountains quaked at thy presence.
For from of old men have not heard, nor perceived by the ear, neither has the eye seen, O God, besides thee, what he has prepared for him who waits for him.
Thou meet him who rejoices and works righteousness, those who remember thee in thy ways. Behold, thou were angry, and we sinned. Therefore we have erred.
For we have all become as unclean, and all our righteous acts are as a polluted garment. And we all fade as a leaf. And our iniquities, like the wind, take us away.
And there is none who calls upon thy name, who stirs himself up to take hold of thee. For thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us through our iniquities.
But now, O Jehovah, thou are our Father. We are the clay, and thou our potter, and we are all the work of thy hand.
Be not angry very severely, O Jehovah, nor remember iniquity forever. Behold, look, we beseech thee, we are all thy people.
Thy holy cities have become a wilderness. Zion has become a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation.
Our holy and our beautiful house, where our fathers praised thee, is burned with fire, and all our pleasant places are laid waste.
Will thou restrain thyself for these things, O Jehovah? Will thou hold thy peace, and afflict us very severely?

I was manifested by those who did not ask for me. I am found by those who did not seek me. I said, Behold me, behold me, to a nation that was not called by my name.
I have spread out my hands all the day to a disobedient and rebellious people, who walk in a way that is not good, according to their own thoughts,
a people who provoke me to my face continually, sacrificing in gardens, and burning incense upon bricks,
who sit among the graves, and lodge in the secret places, who eat swine's flesh, and broth of abominable things is in their vessels,
who say, Stand by thyself, do not come near to me, for I am holier than thou. These are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burns all the day.
Behold, it is written before me. I will not keep silence, but will recompense. Yea, I will recompense into their bosom
your own iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together, says Jehovah, those who have burned incense upon the mountains, and blasphemed me upon the hills. Therefore I will measure their former work into their bosom.
Thus says Jehovah, As the new wine is found in the cluster, and a man says, Destroy it not, for a blessing is in it, so I will do for my servants' sake, that I may not destroy them all.
And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains. And my chosen shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell there.
And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks, and the valley of Achor a place for herds to lie down in, for my people who have sought me.
But ye who forsake Jehovah, who forget my holy mountain, who prepare a table for Fortune, and who fill up mingled wine to Destiny,
I will destine you to the sword, and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter. Because when I called, ye did not answer, when I spoke, ye did not hear, but ye did that which was evil in my eyes, and chose that in which I did not delight.
Therefore thus says the lord Jehovah, Behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry. Behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty. Behold, my servants shall rejoice, but ye shall be put to shame.
Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall wail for vexation of spirit.
And ye shall leave your name for a curse to my chosen, and the lord Jehovah will kill thee. And he will call his servants by another name,
so that he who blesses himself in the earth shall bless himself in the God of truth, and he who swears in the earth shall swear by the God of truth. Because the former troubles are forgotten, and because they are hid from my eyes.
For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth, and the former things shall not be remembered, nor come into mind.
But be ye glad and rejoice forever in that which I create. For, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy.
And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people. And there shall no more be heard in her the voice of weeping and the voice of crying.
There shall be no more from there an infant of days, nor an old man who has not filled his days. For the child shall die a hundred years old, and the sinner being a hundred years old shall be accursed.
And they shall build houses, and inhabit them. And they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them.
They shall not build, and another inhabit. They shall not plant, and another eat. For as the days of a tree shall be the days of my people, and my chosen shall long enjoy the work of their hands.
They shall not labor in vain, nor bring forth for calamity. For they are the seed of the blessed of Jehovah, and their offspring with them.
And it shall come to pass that, before they call, I will answer, and while they are yet speaking, I will hear.
The wolf and the lamb shall feed together, and the lion shall eat straw like the ox, and dust shall be the serpent's food. They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, says Jehovah.

Thus says Jehovah, Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. What manner of house will ye build to me, and what place shall be my rest?
For all these things my hand has made, and all these things came to be, says Jehovah. But to this man I will look, even to him who is poor and of a contrite spirit, and who trembles at my word.
He who slaughters an ox is as he who kills a man. He who sacrifices a lamb, as he who breaks a dog's neck. He who offers an oblation, as swine's blood. He who burns frankincense, as he who blesses an idol. Yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul delights in their abominations.
I also will choose their delusions, and will bring their fears upon them. Because when I called, none answered. When I spoke, they did not hear. But they did that which was evil in my eyes, and chose that in which I did not delight.
Your brothers who hate you, who cast you out for my name's sake, have said, Let Jehovah be glorified, that we may see your joy. But it is those who shall be put to shame.
A voice of tumult from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of Jehovah who renders recompense to his enemies.
Before she travailed, she brought forth. Before her pain came, she was delivered of a man-child.
Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall a land be born in one day? Shall a nation be brought forth at once? For as soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her sons.
Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to bring forth? says Jehovah. Shall I who cause to bring forth shut the womb? says thy God.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad for her, all ye who love her. Rejoice for joy with her, all ye who mourn over her,
that ye may nurse and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolations, that ye may get milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory.
For thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will extend peace to her like a river, and the glory of the nations like an overflowing stream. And ye shall nurse thereof. Ye shall be borne upon the side, and shall be dandled upon the knees.
As one whom his mother comforts, so I will comfort you, and ye shall be comforted in Jerusalem.
And ye shall see, and your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish like the tender grass. And the hand of Jehovah shall be known toward his servants, and he will have indignation against his enemies.
For, behold, Jehovah will come with fire, and his chariots shall be like the whirlwind, to render his anger with fierceness, and his rebuke with flames of fire.
For by fire Jehovah will execute judgment, and by his sword, upon all flesh, and the slain of Jehovah shall be many.
Those who sanctify themselves and purify themselves to go to the gardens, behind one in the midst, eating swine's flesh, and the abomination, and the mouse, they shall come to an end together, says Jehovah.
For I know their works and their thoughts. The time comes, that I will gather all nations and tongues, and they shall come, and shall see my glory.
And I will set a sign among them, and I will send such as escape of them to the nations, to Tarshish, Pul, and Lud, that draw the bow, to Tubal and Javan, to the isles afar off, who have not heard my fame, nor have seen my glory, and they shall declare my glory among the nations.
And they shall bring all your brothers out of all the nations for an oblation to Jehovah, upon horses, and in chariots, and in litters, and upon mules, and upon dromedaries, to my holy mountain Jerusalem, says Jehovah, as the sons of Israel bring their oblation in a clean vessel into the house of Jehovah.
And of them also I will take for priests and for Levites, says Jehovah.
For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain before me, says Jehovah, so shall your seed and your name remain.
And it shall come to pass, that from one new moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, all flesh shall come to worship before me, says Jehovah.
And they shall go forth, and look upon the dead bodies of the men who have transgressed against me. For their worm shall not die, nor shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring to all flesh.

Jeremiah

The words of Jeremiah the son of Hilkiah, of the priests who were in Anathoth in the land of Benjamin,
to whom the word of Jehovah came in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, in the thirteenth year of his reign.
It came also in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the end of the eleventh year of Zedekiah, the son of Josiah, king of Judah, to the carrying away captive of Jerusalem in the fifth month.
Now the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee, and before thou came forth out of the womb I sanctified thee. I have appointed thee a prophet to the nations.
Then I said, Ah, lord Jehovah! Behold, I know not how to speak, for I am a child.
But Jehovah said to me, Say not, I am a child. For to whomever I shall send thee thou shall go, and whatever I shall command thee thou shall speak.
Be not afraid because of them, for I am with thee to deliver thee, says Jehovah.
Then Jehovah put forth his hand, and touched my mouth. And Jehovah said to me, Behold, I have put my words in thy mouth.
See, I have this day set thee over the nations and over the kingdoms, to pluck up and to break down and to destroy and to overthrow, to build and to plant.
Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying, Jeremiah, what do thou see? And I said, I see a rod of an almond tree.
Then Jehovah said to me, Thou have well seen. For I watch over my word to perform it.
And the word of Jehovah came to me the second time, saying, What do thou see? And I said, I see a boiling caldron, and the face of it is from the north.
Then Jehovah said to me, Out of the north evil shall break forth upon all the inhabitants of the land.
For, lo, I will call all the families of the kingdoms of the north, says Jehovah. And they shall come, and they shall set every one his throne at the entrance of the gates of Jerusalem, and against all the walls of it round about, and against all the cities of Judah.
And I will utter my judgments against them concerning all their wickedness, in that they have forsaken me, and have burned incense to other gods, and worshiped the works of their own hands.
Thou therefore gird up thy loins, and arise, and speak to them all that I command thee. Be not dismayed at them, lest I dismay thee before them.
For, behold, I have made thee this day a fortified city, and an iron pillar, and brazen walls, against the whole land, against the kings of Judah, against the rulers of it, against the priests of it, and against the people of the land.
And they shall fight against thee. But they shall not prevail against thee, for I am with thee, says Jehovah, to deliver thee.

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem, saying, Thus says Jehovah, I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, how thou went after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown.
Israel was holiness to Jehovah, the first-fruits of his increase. All who devour him shall be held guilty. Evil shall come upon them, says Jehovah.
Hear ye the word of Jehovah, O house of Jacob, and all the families of the house of Israel.
What unrighteousness have your fathers found in me, that they have gone far from me, and have walked after vanity, and have become vain?
Nor did they say, Where is Jehovah who brought us up out of the land of Egypt, who led us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought and of the shadow of death, through a land that none passed through, and where no man dwelt?
And I brought you into a plentiful land, to eat the fruit of it and the goodness of it. But when ye entered, ye defiled my land, and made my heritage an abomination.
The priests did not say, Where is Jehovah? And those who handle the law did not know me. The rulers also transgressed against me. And the prophets prophesied by Baal, and walked after things that do not profit.
Therefore I will yet contend with you, says Jehovah, and I will contend with your son's sons.
For pass over to the isles of Kittim, and see, and send to Kedar, and consider diligently, and see if there has been such a thing.
Has a nation changed its gods, which yet are no gods? But my people have changed their glory for that which does not profit.
Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this, and be horribly afraid. Be ye very desolate, says Jehovah.
They have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water.
Is Israel a servant? Is he a homebred one? Why has he become a prey?
The young lions have roared upon him, and yelled, and they have made his land waste. His cities are burned up, without inhabitant.
The sons also of Memphis and Tahpanhes have broken the crown of thy head.
Have thou not procured this to thyself, in that thou have forsaken Jehovah thy God when he led thee by the way?
And now what have thou to do in the way to Egypt, to drink the waters of the Shihor? Or what have thou to do in the way to Assyria, to drink the waters of the River?
Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee. Know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and a bitter, that thou have forsaken Jehovah thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts.
For from old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bonds. And thou said, I will not serve, for upon every high hill and under every green tree thou bowed thyself, playing the harlot.
Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed. How then have thou turned into the degenerate branches of a foreign vine to me?
For though thou wash thee with lye, and take thee much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says the lord Jehovah.
How can thou say, I am not defiled; I have not gone after the Baalim? See thy way in the valley. Know what thou have done, a swift dromedary traversing her ways,
a wild donkey used to the wilderness, that sniffs up the wind in her desire. In her time of estrus who can turn her away? All those who seek her will not weary themselves. In her month they shall find her.
Withhold thy foot from being unshod, and thy throat from thirst. But thou said, It is in vain. No, for I have loved strangers, and after them I will go.
As the thief is shamed when he is found, so is the house of Israel shamed, they, their kings, their rulers, and their priests, and their prophets,
who say to a block of wood, Thou are my father, and to a stone, Thou have brought me forth. For they have turned their back to me, and not their face. But in the time of their trouble they will say, Arise, and save us.
But where are thy gods that thou have made thee? Let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble. For according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah.
Why will ye contend with me? Ye have all transgressed against me, says Jehovah.
In vain I have smitten your sons. They received no correction. Your own sword has devoured your prophets like a destroying lion.
O generation, see ye the word of Jehovah. Have I been a wilderness to Israel, or a land of thick darkness? Why do my people say, We have broken loose. We will come no more to thee?
Can a virgin forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet my people have forgotten me days without number.
How thou trim thy way to seek love! Therefore even the wicked women thou have taught thy ways.
Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the innocent poor. Thou did not find them breaking in. But it is because of all these things.
Yet thou said, I am innocent. Surely his anger is turned away from me. Behold, I will enter into judgment with thee because thou say, I have not sinned.
Why do thou gad about so much to change thy way? Thou shall be ashamed of Egypt also, as thou were ashamed of Assyria.
Thou shall also go forth from there with thy hands upon thy head. For Jehovah has rejected those in whom thou trust. And thou shall not prosper with them.

They say, If a man puts away his wife, and she goes from him, and become another man's, will he return to her again? Will not that land be greatly polluted? But thou have played the harlot with many lovers. Yet return again to me, says Jehovah.
Lift up thine eyes to the bare heights, and see. Where have thou not been lain with? By the ways thou have sat for them, as an Arabian in the wilderness, and thou have polluted the land with thy whoredoms and with thy wickedness.
Therefore the showers have been withheld, and there has been no latter rain. Yet thou have a harlot's forehead; thou refused to be ashamed.
Will thou not from this time cry to me, My Father, thou are the guide of my youth?
Will he retain his anger forever? Will he keep it to the end? Behold, thou have spoken, and have done evil things, and have had thy way.
Moreover Jehovah said to me in the days of Josiah the king, Have thou seen that which backsliding Israel has done? She has gone up upon every high mountain and under every green tree, and there has played the harlot.
And I said after she had done all these things, She will return to me, but she returned not. And her treacherous sister Judah saw it.
And I saw, when, for this very cause that backsliding Israel had committed adultery, I had put her away and given her a bill of divorcement, yet treacherous Judah her sister feared not, but she also went and played the harlot.
And it came to pass through the frivolity of her whoredom, that the land was polluted, and she committed adultery with stones and with stocks.
And yet for all this her treacherous sister Judah has not returned to me with her whole heart, but in pretense, says Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to me, Backsliding Israel has shown herself more righteous than treacherous Judah.
Go, and proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding Israel, says Jehovah, I will not look in anger upon you, for I am merciful, says Jehovah. I will not keep anger forever.
Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against Jehovah thy God, and have scattered thy ways to the strangers under every green tree, and ye have not obeyed my voice, says Jehovah.
Return, O backsliding sons, says Jehovah, for I am a husband to you. And I will take you, one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion.
And I will give you shepherds according to my heart, who shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.
And it shall come to pass, when ye are multiplied and increased in the land, in those days, says Jehovah, they shall no more say, The ark of the covenant of Jehovah, nor shall it come to mind. Neither shall they remember it, nor shall they miss it. Neither shall it be made any more.
At that time they shall call Jerusalem the throne of Jehovah, and all the nations shall be gathered to it, to the name of Jehovah, to Jerusalem. Neither shall they walk any more after the stubbornness of their evil heart.
In those days the house of Judah shall walk with the house of Israel, and they shall come together out of the land of the north to the land that I gave for an inheritance to your fathers.
But I said, How I will put thee among the sons, and give thee a pleasant land, a goodly heritage of the hosts of the nations! And I said, Ye shall call me My Father, and shall not turn away from following me.
Surely as a wife treacherously departs from her husband, so ye have dealt treacherously with me, O house of Israel, says Jehovah.
A voice is heard upon the bare heights, the weeping and the supplications of the sons of Israel, because they have perverted their way; they have forgotten Jehovah their God.
Return, ye backsliding sons, I will heal your backslidings. Behold, we have come to thee, for thou are Jehovah our God.
Truly it is in vain from the heights, the multitude on the mountains. Truly in Jehovah our God is the salvation of Israel.
But the shameful thing has devoured the labor of our fathers from our youth, their flocks and their herds, their sons and their daughters.
Let us lie down in our shame, and let our confusion cover us, for we have sinned against Jehovah our God, we and our fathers, from our youth even to this day, and we have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God.

If thou will return, O Israel, says Jehovah, if thou will return to me, and if thou will put away thine abominations out of my sight, then thou shall not be removed.
And thou shall swear, As Jehovah lives, in truth, in justice, and in righteousness. And the nations shall bless themselves in him, and in him they shall glory.
For thus says Jehovah to the men of Judah and to Jerusalem, Break up your fallow ground, and sow not among thorns.
Circumcise yourselves to Jehovah, and take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah and inhabitants of Jerusalem, lest my wrath go forth like fire, and burn so that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.
Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem, and say, Blow ye the trumpet in the land. Cry aloud and say, Assemble yourselves, and let us go into the fortified cities.
Set up a standard toward Zion. Flee for safety, do not stay. For I will bring evil from the north, and a great destruction.
A lion has gone up from his thicket, and a destroyer of nations. He is on his way, he has gone forth from his place, to make thy land desolate, that thy cities be laid waste, without inhabitant.
For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and wail, for the fierce anger of Jehovah is not turned back from us.
And it shall come to pass at that day, says Jehovah, that the heart of the king shall perish, and the heart of the rulers, and the priests shall be astonished, and the prophets shall wonder.
Then I said, Ah, lord Jehovah! Surely thou have greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem, saying, Ye shall have peace, whereas the sword reaches to the life.
At that time it shall be said to this people and to Jerusalem, A hot wind from the bare heights in the wilderness toward the daughter of my people, not to winnow, nor to cleanse,
a full wind from these shall come for me. Now I will also utter judgments against them.
Behold, he shall come up as clouds, and his chariots as the whirlwind. His horses are swifter than eagles. Woe to us! For we are ruined.
O Jerusalem, wash thy heart from wickedness, that thou may be saved. How long shall thine evil thoughts lodge within thee?
Make ye mention to the nations. Behold, publish against Jerusalem, that watchers come from a far country, and give out their voice against the cities of Judah.
They are as keepers of a field against her round about, because she has been rebellious against me, says Jehovah.
Thy way and thy doings have procured these things to thee. This is thy wickedness, for it is bitter, for it reaches to thy heart.
My anguish, my anguish! I am pained at my very heart. My heart is disquieted in me. I cannot hold my peace, because thou have heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm of war.
Destruction upon destruction is cried, for the whole land is laid waste. Suddenly my tents are destroyed, and my curtains in a moment.
How long shall I see the standard, and hear the sound of the trumpet?
For my people are foolish. They do not know me. They are sottish sons, and they have no understanding. They are wise to do evil, but to do good they have no knowledge.
I beheld the earth, and, lo, it was waste and void, and the heavens, and they had no light.
I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled, and all the hills moved to and fro.
I beheld, and, lo, there was no man, and all the birds of the heavens were fled.
I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful field was a wilderness, and all the cities thereof were broken down at the presence of Jehovah, and before his fierce anger.
The whole land shall be a desolation, yet I will not make a full end.
For this the earth shall mourn, and the heavens above be black, because I have spoken it, I have purposed it, and I have not relented, nor will I turn back from it.
Every city flees for the noise of the horsemen and bowmen. They go into the thickets, and climb up upon the rocks. Every city is forsaken, and not a man dwells in it.
And thou, when thou are made desolate, what will thou do? Though thou clothe thyself with scarlet, though thou deck thee with ornaments of gold, though thou enlarge thine eyes with paint, in vain thou make thyself fair. Thy lovers despise thee, they seek thy life.
For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail, the anguish as of her who brings forth her first child, the voice of the daughter of Zion, who gasps for breath, who spreads her hands, saying, Woe is me now! For my soul faints before the murderers.

Run ye to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, and see now, and know, and seek in the broad places of it, if ye can find a man, if there is any who does justly, who seeks truth, and I will pardon her.
And though they say, As Jehovah lives, surely they swear falsely.
O Jehovah, do not thine eyes look upon truth? Thou have stricken them, but they were not grieved. Thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction. They have made their faces harder than a rock. They have refused to return.
Then I said, Surely these are poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of Jehovah, nor the law of their God.
I will go to the great men, and will speak to them, for they know the way of Jehovah, and the law of their God. But these with one accord have broken the yoke, and burst the bonds.
Therefore a lion out of the forest shall kill them; a wolf of the evenings shall destroy them; a leopard shall watch against their cities. Everyone who goes out from there shall be torn in pieces, because their transgressions are many, and their backslidings are increased.
How can I pardon thee? Thy sons have forsaken me, and sworn by those who are no gods. When I had fed them to the full, they committed adultery, and assembled themselves in troops at the harlots' houses.
They were as fed horses roaming at large; everyone neighed after his neighbor's wife.
Shall I not visit for these things? says Jehovah. And shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
Go ye up upon her walls, and destroy, but make not a full end. Take away her branches, for they are not Jehovah's.
For the house of Israel and the house of Judah have dealt very treacherously against me, says Jehovah.
They have denied Jehovah, and said, It is not he. Neither shall evil come upon us, nor shall we see sword nor famine.
And the prophets shall become wind, and the word is not in them. Thus shall it be done to them.
Because ye speak this word, behold, I will make my words in thy mouth fire, and this people wood, and it shall devour them.
Lo, I will bring a nation upon you from far, O house of Israel, says Jehovah. It is a mighty nation. It is an ancient nation, a nation whose language thou know not, nor understand what they say.
Their quiver is an open sepulcher. They are all mighty men.
And they shall eat up thy harvest, and thy bread, which thy sons and thy daughters should eat. They shall eat up thy flocks and thy herds. They shall eat up thy vines and thy fig trees. They shall beat down thy fortified cities, wherein thou trust, with the sword.
But even in those days, says Jehovah, I will not make a full end with you.
And it shall come to pass, when ye shall say, Why has Jehovah our God done all these things to us? Then thou shall say to them, Just as ye have forsaken me, and served foreign gods in your land, so ye shall serve strangers in a land that is not yours.
Declare ye this in the house of Jacob, and publish it in Judah, saying,
Do ye not fear me? says Jehovah. Will ye not tremble at my presence, who have placed the sand for the bound of the sea by a perpetual decree, that it cannot pass it? And though the waves thereof toss themselves, yet they cannot prevail, though they roar, yet they cannot pass over it.
But this people has a revolting and a rebellious heart. They have revolted and gone.
Neither do they say in their heart, Let us now fear Jehovah our God, who gives rain, both the former and the latter, in its season, who preserves to us the appointed weeks of the harvest.
Your iniquities have turned away these things, and your sins have withheld good from you.
For among my people are found wicked men. They watch as fowlers lie in wait. They set a trap; they catch men.
As a cage is full of birds, so are their houses full of deceit. Therefore they have become great, and grown rich.
They have grown fat. They shine. Yea, they overflow in deeds of wickedness. They do not plead the cause, the cause of the fatherless, that they may prosper. And they do not judge the right of the needy.
Shall I not visit for these things? says Jehovah. Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
An astonishing and horrible thing has come to pass in the land.
The prophets prophesy falsely, and the priests bear rule by their means. And my people love to have it so. And what will ye do in the end thereof?

Flee for safety, ye sons of Benjamin, out of the midst of Jerusalem. And blow the trumpet in Tekoa, and raise up a signal on Beth-haccherem. For evil looks forth from the north, and a great destruction.
The comely and delicate one, the daughter of Zion, I will cut off.
Shepherds with their flocks shall come to her. They shall pitch their tents against her round about. They shall feed every one in his place.
Prepare ye war against her. Arise, and let us go up at noon. Woe to us! For the day declines; for the shadows of the evening are stretched out.
Arise, and let us go up by night, and let us destroy her palaces.
Hew ye down trees, and cast up a mound against Jerusalem. This is the city to be visited. She has oppression completely in the midst of her.
As a well casts forth its waters, so she casts forth her wickedness. Violence and destruction is heard in her. Continually before me is sickness and wounds.
Be thou instructed, O Jerusalem, lest my soul be alienated from thee, lest I make thee a desolation, a land not inhabited.
They shall thoroughly glean the remnant of Israel as a vine. Turn again thy hand as a grape gatherer into the baskets.
To whom shall I speak and testify, that they may hear? Behold, their ear is uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken. Behold, the word of Jehovah has become to them a reproach; they have no delight in it.
Therefore I am full of the wrath of Jehovah. I am weary with holding in. Pour it out upon the sons in the street, and upon the assembly of young men together. For even the husband with the wife shall be taken, the aged with him who is full of days.
And their houses shall be turned to others, their fields and their wives together. For I will stretch out my hand upon the inhabitants of the land, says Jehovah.
For from the least of them even to the greatest of them everyone is given to covetousness. And from the prophet even to the priest everyone deals falsely.
They have also lightly healed the hurt of my people, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? No, they were not at all ashamed, nor could they blush. Therefore they shall fall among those who fall. At the time that I visit them they shall be cast down, says Jehovah.
Thus says Jehovah, Stand ye in the ways and see. And ask for the old paths where is the good way. And walk in it, and ye shall find rest for your souls. But they said, We will not walk.
And I set watchmen over you, saying, Hearken to the sound of the trumpet. But they said, We will not hearken.
Therefore hear, ye nations, and know, O congregation, what is among them.
Behold, I will bring evil upon this people, even the fruit of their thoughts, because they have not hearkened to my words. And as for my law, they have rejected it.
To what purpose does there come to me frankincense from Sheba, and the sweet cane from a far country? Your burnt offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices pleasing to me.
Behold, I will lay stumbling-blocks before this people, and the fathers and the sons together shall stumble against them. The neighbor and his friend shall perish.
Thus says Jehovah, Behold, a people comes from the north country, and a great nation shall be stirred up from the outermost parts of the earth.
They lay hold on bow and spear. They are cruel, and have no mercy. Their voice roars like the sea, and they ride upon horses. Each one set in array, as a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Zion.
We have heard the report of it. Our hands grow feeble. Anguish has taken hold of us, and pangs as of a woman in travail.
Go not forth into the field, nor walk by the way, for the sword of the enemy, and terror, are on every side.
O daughter of my people, gird thee with sackcloth, and wallow thyself in ashes. Make thee mourning, as for an only son, a most bitter lamentation. For the destroyer shall suddenly come upon us.
I have made thee a prover and a fortress among my people, that thou may know and try their way.
They are all grievous revolters, going about with slanders. They are brass and iron. They all of them deal corruptly.
The bellows blow fiercely, the lead is consumed of the fire. In vain do they go on refining, for the wicked are not plucked away.
Waste silver, men shall call them, because Jehovah has rejected them.

The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Stand in the gate of Jehovah's house, and proclaim there this word, and say, Hear the word of Jehovah, all ye of Judah, who enter in at these gates to worship Jehovah.
Amend your ways and your doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place.
Trust ye not in lying words, saying, The temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, the temple of Jehovah, are these.
For if ye thoroughly amend your ways and your doings, if ye thoroughly execute justice between a man and his neighbor,
if ye do not oppress the sojourner, the fatherless, and the widow, and shed not innocent blood in this place, nor walk after other gods to your own hurt,
then I will cause you to dwell in this place, in the land that I gave to your fathers from of old even for evermore.
Behold, ye trust in lying words, that cannot profit.
Will ye steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and burn incense to Baal, and walk after other gods that ye have not known,
and then come and stand before me in this house, which is called by my name, and say, We are delivered, that ye may do all these abominations?
Has this house, which is called by my name, become a den of robbers in your eyes? Behold, I, even I, have seen it, says Jehovah.
But go ye now to my place which was in Shiloh, where I caused my name to dwell at the first, and see what I did to it for the wickedness of my people Israel.
And now, because ye have done all these works, says Jehovah. And I spoke to you, rising up early and speaking, but ye heard not, and I called you, but ye answered not,
therefore I will do to the house, which is called by my name, in which ye trust, and to the place which I gave to you and to your fathers, as I did to Shiloh.
And I will cast you out of my sight, as I have cast out all your brothers, even the whole seed of Ephraim.
Therefore pray thou not for this people, nor lift up cry nor prayer for them. Neither make intercession to me, for I will not hear thee.
Do thou not see what they do in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem?
The sons gather wood, and the fathers kindle the fire, and the women knead the dough, to make cakes to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings to other gods, that they may provoke me to anger.
Do they provoke me to anger? says Jehovah, and not themselves, to the confusion of their own faces?
Behold, my anger and my wrath shall be poured out upon this place, upon man, and upon beast, and upon the trees of the field, and upon the fruit of the ground. And it shall burn, and shall not be quenched.
Add your burnt offerings to your sacrifices, and eat ye flesh.
For I spoke not to your fathers, nor commanded them in the day that I brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning burnt offerings or sacrifices.
But this thing I commanded them, saying, Hearken to my voice, and I will be your God, and ye shall be my people. And walk ye in all the way that I command you, that it may be well with you.
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but walked in their own counsels, in the stubbornness of their evil heart, and went backward, and not forward.
Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land of Egypt to this day, I have sent to you all my servants the prophets, daily rising up early and sending them.
Yet they hearkened not to me, nor inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff. They did worse than their fathers.
And thou shall speak all these words to them, but they will not hearken to thee. Thou shall also call to them, but they will not answer thee.
And thou shall say to them, This is the nation that has not hearkened to the voice of Jehovah their God, nor received instruction. Truth has perished, and is cut off from their mouth.
Cut off thy hair, O Jerusalem, and cast it away, and take up a lamentation on the bare heights. For Jehovah has rejected and forsaken the generation of his wrath.
For the sons of Judah have done that which is evil in my sight, says Jehovah. They have set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile it.
And they have built the high places of Topheth, which is in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to burn their sons and their daughters in the fire, which I did not command, nor did it come into my mind.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that it shall no more be called Topheth, nor The valley of the son of Hinnom, but The valley of Slaughter. For they shall bury in Topheth, till there be no place to bury.
And the dead bodies of this people shall be food for the birds of the heavens, and for the beasts of the earth, and none shall frighten them away.
Then I will cause to cease from the cities of Judah, and from the streets of Jerusalem, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, for the land shall become a waste.

At that time, says Jehovah, they shall bring out the bones of the kings of Judah, and the bones of his rulers, and the bones of the priests, and the bones of the prophets, and the bones of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves.
And they shall spread them before the sun, and the moon, and all the host of heaven, which they have loved, and which they have served, and after which they have walked, and which they have sought, and which they have worshiped. They shall not be gathered, nor be buried. They shall be for dung upon the face of the earth.
And death shall be chosen rather than life by all the residue that remain of this evil family, that remain in all the places where I have driven them, says Jehovah of hosts.
Shall men fall, and not rise up again? Shall he turn away, and not return?
Why then has this people of Jerusalem slid back by a perpetual backsliding? They hold firm deceit. They refuse to return.
I hearkened and heard, but they did not speak aright. No man repents of his wickedness, saying, What have I done? Everyone turns to his course as a horse that rushes headlong in the battle.
Yea, the stork in the heavens knows her appointed times, and the turtledove and the swallow and the crane observe the time of their coming, but my people know not the law of Jehovah.
How can ye say, We are wise, and the law of Jehovah is with us? But behold, the false pen of the scribes has wrought falsely.
The wise men are put to shame. They are dismayed and taken. Lo, they have rejected the word of Jehovah, and what manner of wisdom is in them?
Therefore I will give their wives to others, and their fields to those who shall possess them. For everyone from the least even to the greatest is given to covetousness. From the prophet even to the priest everyone deals falsely.
And they have lightly healed the hurt of the daughter of my people, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.
Were they ashamed when they had committed abomination? No, they were not at all ashamed, nor could they blush. Therefore they shall fall among those who fall. In the time of their visitation they shall be cast down, says Jehovah.
I will utterly consume them, says Jehovah. There shall be no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and the leaf shall fade, and things I have given them shall pass away from them.
Why do we sit still? Assemble yourselves, and let us enter into the fortified cities, and let us be silent there. For Jehovah our God has put us to silence, and given us water of gall to drink, because we have sinned against Jehovah.
We looked for peace, but no good came, for a time of healing, and, behold, dismay!
The snorting of his horses is heard from Dan. At the sound of the neighing of his strong ones the whole land trembles. For they have come, and have devoured the land and all that is in it, the city and those who dwell therein.
For, behold, I will send serpents, adders, among you, which will not be charmed, and they shall bite you, says Jehovah.
Oh that I could comfort myself against sorrow! My heart is faint within me.
Is not Jehovah in Zion? Is not her King in her? Why have they provoked me to anger with their graven images, and with foreign vanities?
The harvest is past, the summer is ended, and we are not saved.
For the hurt of the daughter of my people I am hurt. I mourn. Dismay has taken hold on me.
Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no physician there? Why then has not the health of the daughter of my people recovered?

Oh that my head were waters, and my eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my people!
Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging-place of wayfaring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them! For they are all adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men.
And they bend their tongue-their bow-for falsehood, and they have grown strong in the land, but not for truth. For they proceed from evil to evil, and they do not know me, says Jehovah.
Take ye heed each one of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother, for every brother will utterly supplant, and every neighbor will go about with slanders.
And they will deceive each one his neighbor, and will not speak the truth. They have taught their tongue to speak lies. They weary themselves to commit iniquity.
Thy habitation is in the midst of deceit. Through deceit they refuse to know me, says Jehovah.
Behold, I will melt them, and try them, for how else should I do, because of the daughter of my people?
Their tongue is a deadly arrow; it speaks deceit. He speaks peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in his heart he lies wait for him.
Shall I not visit them for these things? says Jehovah. Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this?
For the mountains I will take up a weeping and wailing, and for the pastures of the wilderness a lamentation, because they are burned up, so that none passes through, nor can men hear the voice of the cattle. Both the birds of the heavens and the beasts have fled; they are gone.
And I will make Jerusalem heaps, a dwelling-place of jackals. And I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant.
Who is the wise man, who may understand this, and he to whom the mouth of Jehovah has spoken, that he may declare it? Why has the land perished and burned up like a wilderness, so that none passes through?
And Jehovah says, Because they have forsaken my law which I set before them, and have not obeyed my voice, nor walked in it,
but have walked after the stubbornness of their own heart, and after the Baalim, which their fathers taught them.
Behold, I will feed them, even this people, with wormwood, and give them water of gall to drink.
I will scatter them also among the nations, whom neither they nor their fathers have known. And I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, Consider ye, and call for the mourning women, that they may come, and send for the skilful women, that they may come.
And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us, that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with waters.
For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion, How we are ruined! We are greatly confounded, because we have forsaken the land, because they have cast down our dwellings.
Yet hear the word of Jehovah, O ye women, and let your ear receive the word of his mouth, and teach your daughters wailing, and each one her neighbor lamentation.
For death has come up into our windows. It has entered into our palaces, to cut off the sons from outside, the young men from the streets.
The dead bodies of men shall fall as dung upon the open field, and as the handful after the harvestman, and none shall gather.
Let not the wise man glory in his wisdom, nor let the mighty man glory in his might. Let not the rich man glory in his riches,
but let him who boasts boast in this, that he has understanding, and knows me, that I am Jehovah who exercises loving kindness, justice, and righteousness, in the earth. For in these things I delight, says Jehovah.
Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the sons of Ammon, and Moab, and all who have the corners of their hair cut off, who dwell in the wilderness. For all the nations are uncircumcised, and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in heart.

Hear ye the word which Jehovah speaks to you, O house of Israel.
Learn not the way of the nations, and be not dismayed at the signs of heaven, for the nations are dismayed at them.
For the customs of the peoples are vanity. For a man cuts a tree out of the forest, the work of the hands of the workman with the axe.
They deck it with silver and with gold. They fasten it with nails and with hammers, that it not move.
They are like a palm tree, of turned work, and do not speak. They must be carried, because they cannot go. Be not afraid of them, for they cannot do evil, nor is it in them to do good.
There is none like thee, O Jehovah. Thou are great, and thy name is great in might.
Who should not fear thee, O King of the nations? For to thee it appertains, inasmuch as among all the wise men of the nations, and in all their royal estate, there is none like thee.
But they are together brutish and foolish, the instruction of idols! It is but a block of wood.
There is silver beaten into plates, which is brought from Tarshish, and gold from Uphaz, the work of the artificer and of the hands of the goldsmith, blue and purple for their clothing. They are all the work of skilful men.
But Jehovah is the true God. He is the living God, and an everlasting King. At his wrath the earth trembles, and the nations are not able to abide his indignation.
The gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, these shall perish from the earth, and from under the heavens.
He has made the earth by his power. He has established the world by his wisdom, and by his understanding he has stretched out the heavens.
When he utters his voice, there is a tumult of waters in the heavens, and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightnings for the rain, and brings forth the wind out of his treasuries.
Every man has become brutish, without knowledge. Every goldsmith is put to shame by his graven image. For his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.
They are vanity, a work of delusion. In the time of their visitation they shall perish.
The portion of Jacob is not like these. For he is the former of all things, and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance. Jehovah of hosts is his name.
Gather up thy wares out of the land, O thou who abides in the siege.
For thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will sling out the inhabitants of the land at this time, and will distress them, that they may feel it.
Woe is me because of my hurt! My wound is grievous, but I said, Truly this is my grief, and I must bear it.
My tent is destroyed, and all my cords are broken. My sons have gone forth from me, and they are not. There is none to spread my tent any more, and to set up my curtains.
For the shepherds have become brutish, and have not inquired of Jehovah. Therefore they have not prospered, and all their flocks are scattered.
The voice of news. Behold, it comes, and a great commotion out of the north country, to make the cities of Judah a desolation, a dwelling-place of jackals.
O Jehovah, I know that the way of man is not in himself. It is not in man who walks to direct his steps.
O Jehovah, correct me, but in measure, not in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing.
Pour out thy wrath upon the nations that know thee not, and upon the families that call not on thy name. For they have devoured Jacob. Yea, they have devoured him and consumed him, and have laid waste his habitation.

The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Hear ye the words of this covenant, and speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
Cursed be the man who does not hear the words of this covenant,
which I commanded your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the iron furnace, saying, Obey my voice, and do them, according to all which I command you, so ye shall be my people, and I will be your God,
that I may establish the oath which I swore to your fathers, to give them a land flowing with milk and honey, as at this day. Then I answered, and said, Truly, O Jehovah.
And Jehovah said to me, Proclaim all these words in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, saying, Hear ye the words of this covenant, and do them.
For I earnestly protested to your fathers in the day that I brought them up out of the land of Egypt, even to this day, rising early and protesting, saying, Obey my voice.
Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear, but walked each one in the stubbornness of his evil heart. Therefore I brought upon them all the words of this covenant, which I commanded them to do, but they did them not.
And Jehovah said to me, A conspiracy is found among the men of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
They have turned back to the iniquities of their forefathers, who refused to hear my words, and they have gone after other gods to serve them. The house of Israel and the house of Judah have broken my covenant which I made with their fathers.
Therefore thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape. And they shall cry to me, but I will not hearken to them.
Then the cities of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem shall go and cry to the gods to which they offer incense, but they will not save them at all in the time of their trouble.
For according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah, and according to the number of the streets of Jerusalem ye have set up altars to the shameful thing, even altars to burn incense to Baal.
Therefore do not pray thou for this people, nor lift up cry nor prayer for them, for I will not hear them in the time that they cry to me because of their trouble.
What has my beloved to do in my house, seeing she has wrought lewdness with many, and the holy flesh has passed from thee? When thou do evil, then thou rejoice.
Jehovah called thy name, A green olive tree, fair with goodly fruit. With the noise of a great tumult he has kindled fire upon it, and the branches of it are broken.
For Jehovah of hosts, who planted thee, has pronounced evil against thee because of the evil of the house of Israel and of the house of Judah, which they have wrought for themselves in provoking me to anger by offering incense to Baal.
And Jehovah gave me knowledge of it, and I knew it. Then thou showed me their doings.
But I was like a gentle lamb that is led to the slaughter. And I knew not that they had devised devices against me, saying, Let us destroy the tree with the fruit of it. And let us cut him off from the land of the living, that his name may no more be remembered.
But, O Jehovah of hosts, who judges righteously, who tries the heart and the mind, I shall see thy vengeance on them, for to thee I have revealed my case.
Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning the men of Anathoth, who seek thy life, saying, Thou shall not prophesy in the name of Jehovah, that thou not die by our hand.
Behold, I will punish them. The young men shall die by the sword. Their sons and their daughters shall die by famine,
and there shall be no remnant to them. For I will bring evil upon the men of Anathoth, even the year of their visitation.

Thou are righteous, O Jehovah, when I contend with thee. Yet I would reason the case with thee. Why does the way of the wicked prosper? Why are all those at ease who deal very treacherously?
Thou have planted them. Yea, they have taken root, they grow. Yea, they bring forth fruit. Thou are near in their mouth, and far from their heart.
But thou, O Jehovah, know me. Thou see me, and try my heart toward thee. Pull them out like sheep for the slaughter, and prepare them for the day of slaughter.
How long shall the land mourn, and the herbs of the whole country wither? For the wickedness of those who dwell therein, the beasts are consumed, and the birds, because they said, He shall not see our latter end.
If thou have run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee, then how can thou contend with horses? And though in a land of peace thou are secure, yet how will thou do in the pride of the Jordan?
For even thy brothers, and the house of thy father, even they have dealt treacherously with thee, even they have cried aloud after thee. Believe them not, though they speak fair words to thee.
I have forsaken my house. I have cast off my heritage. I have given the dearly beloved of my soul into the hand of her enemies.
My heritage has become to me as a lion in the forest. She has uttered her voice against me. Therefore I have hated her.
Is my heritage to me as a speckled bird of prey? Are the birds of prey against her round about? Go ye, assemble all the beasts of the field; bring them to devour.
Many shepherds have destroyed my vineyard. They have trodden my portion under foot. They have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness.
They have made it a desolation. It mourns to me, being desolate. The whole land is made desolate, because no man lays it to heart.
Destroyers have come upon all the bare heights in the wilderness. For the sword of Jehovah devours from the one end of the land even to the other end of the land. No flesh has peace.
They have sown wheat, and have reaped thorns. They have put themselves to pain, and profit nothing. And ye shall be ashamed of your fruits, because of the fierce anger of Jehovah.
Behold, I will pluck them up from off their land, and will pluck up the house of Judah from among them.
And it shall come to pass, after I have plucked them up, I will return and have compassion on them. And I will bring them again, each man to his heritage, and each man to his land.
And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of my people, to swear by my name, As Jehovah lives, even as they taught my people to swear by Baal, then they shall be built up in the midst of my people.
But if they will not hear, then I will pluck up that nation, plucking up and destroying it, says Jehovah.

Thus says Jehovah to me, Go, and buy thee a linen sash, and put it upon thy loins, and do not put it in water.
So I bought a sash according to the word of Jehovah, and put it upon my loins.
And the word of Jehovah came to me the second time, saying,
Take the sash that thou have bought, which is upon thy loins, and arise, go to the Euphrates, and hide it there in a cleft of the rock.
So I went, and hid it by the Euphrates, as Jehovah commanded me.
And it came to pass after many days, that Jehovah said to me, Arise, go to the Euphrates, and take the sash from there, which I commanded thee to hide there.
Then I went to the Euphrates, and dug, and took the sash from the place where I had hid it. And, behold, the sash was rotten. It was good for nothing.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Thus says Jehovah, After this manner I will mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem.
This evil people, who refuse to hear my words, who walk in the stubbornness of their heart, and have gone after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, shall even be as this sash, which is good for nothing.
For as the sash clings to the loins of a man, so I have caused to cling to me the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, says Jehovah, that they may be to me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory, but they would not hear.
Every bottle shall be filled with wine. And they shall say to thee, Do we not certainly know that every bottle shall be filled with wine?
Behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this land, even the kings who sit upon David's throne, and the priests, and the prophets, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, with drunkenness.
And I will dash them one against another, even the fathers and the sons together, says Jehovah. I will not pity, nor spare, nor have compassion, that I should not destroy them.
Hear ye, and give ear, be not proud, for Jehovah has spoken.
Give glory to Jehovah your God, before he causes darkness, and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains. And, while ye look for light, he turns it into the shadow of death, and makes it gross darkness.
But if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret for your pride. And my eye shall weep greatly, and run down with tears, because Jehovah's flock is taken captive.
Humble yourselves. Sit down, for your coronets have come down, even the crown of your glory.
The cities of the South are shut up, and there is none to open them. Judah is carried away captive, all of it. It is wholly carried away captive.
Lift up your eyes, and behold those who come from the north. Where is the flock that was given thee, thy beautiful flock?
What will thou say when he shall set over thee as head those whom thou thyself have taught to be friends to thee? Shall not sorrows take hold of thee as of a woman in travail?
And if thou say in thy heart, Why have these things come upon me? For the greatness of thine iniquity thy skirts are uncovered, and thy heels suffer violence.
Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots? Then ye also may do good, who are accustomed to do evil.
Therefore I will scatter them as the stubble that passes away by the wind of the wilderness.
This is thy lot, the portion measured to thee from me, says Jehovah, because thou have forgotten me, and trusted in falsehood.
Therefore I will also uncover thy skirts upon thy face, and thy shame shall appear.
I have seen thine abominations, even thine adulteries, and thy neighings, the lewdness of thy whoredom, on the hills, in the field. Woe to thee, O Jerusalem! Thou will not be made clean. How long shall it yet be?

The word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah concerning the drought.
Judah mourns, and the gates thereof languish. They sit in black upon the ground, and the cry of Jerusalem has gone up.
And their ranking men send their little ones to the waters. They come to the cisterns, and find no water. They return with their vessels empty. They are put to shame and confounded, and cover their heads,
because of the ground which is cracked. Because no rain has been in the land, the plowmen are put to shame; they cover their heads.
Yea, the hind also in the field calves, and forsakes it because there is no grass.
And the wild donkeys stand on the bare heights. They pant for air like jackals. Their eyes fail because there is no herbage.
Though our iniquities testify against us, work thou for thy name's sake, O Jehovah. For our backslidings are many. We have sinned against thee.
O thou hope of Israel, the Savior of it in the time of trouble, why should thou be as a sojourner in the land, and as a wayfaring man who turns aside to tarry for a night?
Why should thou be as a man frightened, as a mighty man who cannot save? Yet thou, O Jehovah, are in the midst of us, and we are called by thy name. Do not leave us.
Even so they have loved to wander. They have not restrained their feet. Therefore Jehovah does not accept them. Now he will remember their iniquity, and visit their sins.
And Jehovah said to me, Pray not for this people for good.
When they fast, I will not hear their cry. And when they offer burnt offering and meal offering, I will not accept them. But I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence.
Then I said, Ah, lord Jehovah! Behold, the prophets say to them, Ye shall not see the sword, nor shall ye have famine, but I will give you assured peace in this place.
Then Jehovah said to me, The prophets prophesy lies in my name. I did not send them, nor have I commanded them, nor did I speak to them. They prophesy to you a lying vision, and divination, and a thing of naught, and the deceit of their own heart.
By sword and famine those prophets shall be consumed.
And the people to whom they prophesy shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem because of the famine and the sword, and they shall have none to bury them-them, their wives, nor their sons, nor their daughters. For I will pour their wickedness upon them.
Let my eyes run down with tears night and day, and let them not cease. For the virgin daughter of my people is broken with a great breach, with a very grievous wound.
If I go forth into the field, then, behold, the slain with the sword! And if I enter into the city, then, behold, those who are sick with famine! For both the prophet and the priest go about in the land, and have no knowledge.
Have thou utterly rejected Judah? Has thy soul loathed Zion? Why have thou smitten us, and there is no healing for us? We looked for peace, but no good came, and for a time of healing, and, behold, dismay!
We acknowledge, O Jehovah, our wickedness, and the iniquity of our fathers, for we have sinned against thee.
Do not abhor us. For thy name's sake, do not disgrace the throne of thy glory. Remember, do not break thy covenant with us.
Are there any among the vanities of the nations that can cause rain? Or can the heavens give showers? Are not thou he, O Jehovah our God? Therefore we will wait for thee, for thou have made all these things.

Then Jehovah said to me, Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my mind would not be toward this people. Cast them out of my sight, and let them go forth.
Such as are for death, to death, and such as are for the sword, to the sword, and such as are for the famine, to the famine, and such as are for captivity, to captivity.
the sword to kill, and the dogs to tear, and the birds of the heavens, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and to destroy.
And I will cause them to be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth, because of Manasseh, the son of Hezekiah, king of Judah, for that which he did in Jerusalem.
For who will have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem? Or who will bemoan thee? Or who will turn aside to ask of thy welfare?
Thou have rejected me, says Jehovah. Thou have gone backward. Therefore I have stretched out my hand against thee, and destroyed thee. I am weary with relenting.
And I have winnowed them with a fan in the gates of the land. I have bereaved them of sons. I have destroyed my people. They did not return from their ways.
Their widows have increased to me above the sand of the seas. I have brought upon them, against the mother of the young men, a destroyer at noonday. I have caused anguish and terrors to fall upon her suddenly.
She who has borne seven, languishes. She has given up the spirit. Her sun has gone down while it was yet day. She has been put to shame and confounded. And the residue of them I will deliver to the sword before their enemies, says Jehovah.
Woe is me, my mother, that thou have bore me, a man of strife and a man of contention to the whole earth! I have not lent, nor have men lent to me, yet every one of them curses me.
Jehovah said, Truly I will strengthen thee for good. Truly I will cause the enemy to make supplication to thee in the time of evil and in the time of affliction.
Can a man break iron, even iron from the north, and brass?
Thy substance and thy treasures I will give for a spoil without price. And that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders.
And I will make them to pass with thine enemies into a land which thou know not. For a fire is kindled in my anger, which shall burn upon you.
O Jehovah, thou know. Remember me, and visit me, and avenge me of my persecutors. Take me not away in thy longsuffering. Know that for thy sake I have suffered reproach.
Thy words were found, and I ate them. And thy words were to me a joy and the rejoicing of my heart. For I am called by thy name, O Jehovah, God of hosts.
I did not sit in the assembly of those who make merry, nor did I rejoice. I sat alone because of thy hand, for thou have filled me with indignation.
Why is my pain perpetual, and my wound incurable, which refuses to be healed? Will thou indeed be to me as a deceitful brook, as waters that fail?
If thou return, then I will bring thee again that thou may stand before me. And if thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shall be as my mouth. They shall return to thee, but thou shall not return to them.
And I will make thee to this people a fortified brazen wall. And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against thee. For I am with thee to save thee and to deliver thee, says Jehovah.
And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked, and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible.

The word of Jehovah came also to me, saying,
Thou shall not take thee a wife, nor shall thou have sons or daughters, in this place.
They shall die grievous deaths. They shall not be lamented, nor shall they be buried; they shall be as dung upon the face of the ground. And they shall be consumed by the sword, and by famine. And their dead bodies shall be food for the birds of the heavens, and for the beasts of the earth.
For thus says Jehovah, Enter not into the house of mourning, nor go to lament, nor bemoan them, for I have taken away my peace from this people, says Jehovah, even loving kindness and tender mercies.
Both great and small shall die in this land. They shall not be buried, nor shall men lament for them, nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them,
nor shall men break bread for them in mourning, to comfort them for the dead, nor shall men give them the cup of consolation to drink for their father or for their mother.
And thou shall not go into the house of feasting to sit with them, to eat and to drink.
Behold, I will cause to cease out of this place, before your eyes and in your days, the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride.
And it shall come to pass, when thou shall show this people all these words, and they shall say to thee, Why has Jehovah pronounced all this great evil against us? Or what is our iniquity? Or what is our sin that we have committed against Jehovah our God?
Then thou shall say to them, Because your fathers have forsaken me, says Jehovah, and have walked after other gods, and have served them, and have worshiped them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept my law.
And ye have done evil more than your fathers, for, behold, ye walk each one after the stubbornness of his evil heart, so that ye hearken not to me.
Therefore I will cast you forth out of this land into the land that ye have not known, neither ye nor your fathers, and there ye shall serve other gods day and night, for I will show you no favor.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that it shall no more be said, As Jehovah lives who brought up the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt,
but, As Jehovah lives who brought up the sons of Israel from the land of the north, and from all the countries where he had driven them. And I will bring them again into their land that I gave to their fathers.
Behold, I will send for many fishermen, says Jehovah, and they shall fish them up. And afterward I will send for many hunters, and they shall hunt them from every mountain, and from every hill, and out of the clefts of the rocks.
For my eyes are upon all their ways. They are not hid from my face, nor is their iniquity concealed from my eyes.
And first I will recompense their iniquity and their sin double, because they have polluted my land with the carcasses of their detestable things, and have filled my inheritance with their abominations.
O Jehovah, my strength, and my stronghold, and my refuge in the day of affliction, to thee the nations shall come from the ends of the earth, and shall say, Our fathers have inherited nothing but lies, even vanity and things in which there is no profit.
Shall a man make to himself gods, which yet are no gods?
Therefore, behold, I will cause them to know, this once I will cause them to know my hand and my might, and they shall know that my name is Jehovah.

The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond. It is engraved upon the tablet of their heart, and upon the horns of your altars,
while their sons remember their altars and their Asherim by the green trees upon the high hills.
O my mountain in the field, I will give thy substance and all thy treasures for a spoil, and thy high places, because of sin, throughout all thy borders.
And thou, even of thyself, shall discontinue from thy heritage that I gave thee, and I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land which thou know not. For ye have kindled a fire in my anger which shall burn forever.
Cursed is the man who trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from Jehovah.
For he shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good comes, but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, a salt land and not inhabited.
Blessed is the man who trusts in Jehovah, and whose trust Jehovah is.
For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters, that spreads out its roots by the river, and shall not fear when heat comes, but its leaf shall be green, and shall not be worried in the year of drought, nor shall cease from yielding fruit.
The heart is deceitful above all things, and it is exceedingly corrupt. Who can know it?
I, Jehovah, search the mind. I try the heart, even to give every man according to his ways, according to the fruit of his doings.
As the partridge that sits on eggs which she has not laid, so is he who gets riches, and not by right. In the midst of his days they shall leave him, and at his end he shall be a fool.
A glorious throne, set on high from the beginning, is the place of our sanctuary.
O Jehovah, the hope of Israel, all who forsake thee shall be put to shame. Those who depart from me shall be written in the earth, because they have forsaken Jehovah, the fountain of living waters.
Heal me, O Jehovah, and I shall be healed. Save me, and I shall be saved, for thou are my praise.
Behold, they say to me, Where is the word of Jehovah? Let it come now.
As for me, I have not hastened from being a shepherd after thee, nor have I desired the woeful day. Thou know. That which came out of my lips was before thy face.
Be not a terror to me. Thou are my refuge in the day of evil.
Let them be put to shame who persecute me, but let me not be put to shame. Let them be dismayed, but let me not be dismayed. Bring upon them the day of evil, and destroy them with double destruction.
Thus Jehovah said to me, Go, and stand in the gate of the sons of the people, by which the kings of Judah come in, and by which they go out, and in all the gates of Jerusalem.
And say to them, Hear ye the word of Jehovah, ye kings of Judah, and all Judah, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, who enter in by these gates.
Take heed to yourselves, and bear no burden on the sabbath day, nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem.
Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day, nor do ye any work. But hallow ye the sabbath day, as I commanded your fathers.
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear, but made their neck stiff, that they might not hear, and might not receive instruction.
And it shall come to pass, if ye diligently hearken to me, says Jehovah, to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath day, but to hallow the sabbath day, to do no work in it,
then there shall enter in by the gates of this city kings and rulers sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, they, and their rulers, the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And this city shall remain forever.
And they shall come from the cities of Judah, and from the places round about Jerusalem, and from the land of Benjamin, and from the lowland, and from the hill-country, and from the South, bringing burnt offerings, and sacrifices, and meal offerings, and frankincense, and bringing things of thanksgiving, to the house of Jehovah.
But if ye will not hearken to me to hallow the sabbath day, and not to bear a burden and enter in at the gates of Jerusalem on the sabbath day, then I will kindle a fire in the gates of it, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched.

The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Arise, and go down to the potter's house, and there I will cause thee to hear my words.
Then I went down to the potter's house, and, behold, he was making a work on the wheels.
And when the vessel that he made of the clay was marred in the hand of the potter, he made it another vessel again, as seemed good to the potter to make it.
Then the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? says Jehovah. Behold, as the clay in the potter's hand, so are ye in my hand, O house of Israel.
At that instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to break down and to destroy it,
if that nation, concerning which I have spoken, turns from their evil, I will relent of the evil that I thought to do to them.
And at that instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it,
if they do that which is evil in my sight, that they obey not my voice, then I will relent of the good with which I said I would benefit them.
Behold, I frame evil against you, and devise a device against you. Return ye now everyone from his evil way, and amend your ways and your doings.
But they say, It is in vain. For we will walk after our own devices, and we will do everyone according to the stubbornness of his evil heart.
Ask ye now among the nations, Who has heard such things? The virgin of Israel has done a very horrible thing.
Shall the snow of Lebanon fail from the rock of the field? Or shall the cold waters that flow down from afar be dried up?
For my people have forgotten me. They have burned incense to false gods. And they have been made to stumble in their ways, in the ancient paths, to walk in bypaths, in a way not cast up,
to make their land an astonishment, and a perpetual hissing, everyone who passes by it shall be astonished, and shake his head.
I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy. I will show them the back, and not the face, in the day of their calamity.
Then they said, Come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah. For the law shall not perish from the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor the word from the prophet. Come, and let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words.
Give heed to me, O Jehovah, and hearken to the voice of those who contend with me.
Shall evil be recompensed for good? For they have dug a pit for my soul. Remember how I stood before thee to speak good for them, to turn away thy wrath from them.
Therefore deliver up their sons to the famine, and give them over to the power of the sword, and let their wives become childless, and widows, and let their men be slain of death, and their young men smitten of the sword in battle.
Let a cry be heard from their houses when thou shall bring a troop suddenly upon them, for they have dug a pit to take me, and hid snares for my feet.
Yet, Jehovah, thou know all their counsel against me to kill me. Do not forgive their iniquity, nor blot out their sin from thy sight, but let them be overthrown before thee. Deal thou with them in the time of thine anger.

Go, and buy a potter's earthen bottle, and take of the elders of the people, and of the elders of the priests,
and go forth to the valley of the son of Hinnom, which is by the entry of the gate Harsith, and proclaim there the words that I shall tell thee.
Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, which whoever hears, his ears shall tingle.
Because they have forsaken me, and have estranged this place, and have burned incense in it to other gods that they knew not, they and their fathers and the kings of Judah, and have filled this place with the blood of innocents,
and have built the high places of Baal, to burn their sons in the fire for burnt offerings to Baal, which I commanded not, nor spoke it, neither did it come into my mind.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that this place shall no more be called Topheth, nor the valley of the son of Hinnom, but the valley of Slaughter.
And I will make void the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem in this place. And I will cause them to fall by the sword before their enemies, and by the hand of those who seek their life. And I will give their dead bodies to be food for the birds of the heavens, and for the beasts of the earth.
And I will make this city an astonishment, and a hissing. Everyone who passes by it shall be astonished and hiss because of all the plagues of it.
And I will cause them to eat the flesh of their sons and the flesh of their daughters. And they shall eat each one the flesh of his friend, in the siege and in the distress with which their enemies, and those who seek their life, shall distress them.
Then thou shall break the bottle in the sight of the men who go with thee,
Even so I will break this people and this city, as a potter's vessel is broken, that cannot be made whole again. And they shall bury in Topheth till there be no place to bury.
Thus I will do to this place, says Jehovah, and to the inhabitants of it, even making this city as Topheth.
And the houses of Jerusalem, and the houses of the kings of Judah, which are defiled, shall be as the place of Topheth, even all the houses upon whose roofs they have burned incense to all the host of heaven, and have poured out drink offerings to other gods.
Then Jeremiah came from Topheth, where Jehovah had sent him to prophesy, and he stood in the court of Jehovah's house, and said to all the people,
Behold, I will bring upon this city and upon all its towns all the evil that I have pronounced against it, because they have made their neck stiff, that they may not hear my words.

Now Pashhur, the son of Immer the priest, who was chief officer in the house of Jehovah, heard Jeremiah prophesying these things.
Then Pashhur smote Jeremiah the prophet, and put him in the stocks that were in the upper gate of Benjamin, which was in the house of Jehovah.
And it came to pass on the morrow, that Pashhur brought forth Jeremiah out of the stocks. Then Jeremiah said to him, Jehovah has not called thy name Pashhur, but Magor-missabib.
For thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will make thee a terror to thyself, and to all thy friends. And they shall fall by the sword of their enemies, and thine eyes shall behold it. And I will give all Judah into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall carry them captive to Babylon, and shall kill them with the sword.
Moreover I will give all the riches of this city, and all the gains of it, and all the precious things of it, yea, all the treasures of the kings of Judah I will give into the hand of their enemies. And they shall make them a prey, and take them, and carry them to Babylon.
And thou, Pashhur, and all who dwell in thy house shall go into captivity. And thou shall come to Babylon, and there thou shall die, and there thou shall be buried, thou, and all thy friends, to whom thou have prophesied falsely.
O Jehovah, thou have persuaded me, and I was persuaded. Thou are stronger than I, and have prevailed. I have become a laughing-stock all the day; everyone mocks me.
For as often as I speak, I cry out. I cry, Violence and destruction! Because the word of Jehovah is made a reproach to me, and a derision, all the day.
And if I say, I will not make mention of him, nor speak any more in his name, then there is in my heart as it were a burning fire shut up in my bones, and I am weary with forbearing, and I cannot.
For I have heard the defaming of many, terror on every side. Denounce, and we will denounce him, say all my familiar friends, those who watch for my fall. Perhaps he will be persuaded, and we shall prevail against him, and we shall take our revenge on him.
But Jehovah is with me as an awesome mighty one. Therefore my persecutors shall stumble, and they shall not prevail. They shall be utterly put to shame, because they have not dealt wisely, even with an everlasting dishonor which shall never be forgotten.
But, O Jehovah of hosts, who tries the righteous, who sees the heart and the mind, let me see thy vengeance on them, for to thee I have revealed my cause.
Sing to Jehovah. Praise ye Jehovah, for he has delivered the soul of the needy man from the hand of evildoers.
Cursed be the day in which I was born. Let not the day in which my mother bore me be blessed.
Cursed be the man who brought news to my father, saying, A man-child is born to thee, making him very glad.
And let that man be as the cities which Jehovah overthrew, and did not relent. And let him hear a cry in the morning, and shouting at noontime,
because he did not kill me from the womb, and so my mother would have been my grave, and her womb always great.
Why did I come forth out of the womb to see labor and sorrow, that my days should be consumed with shame?

The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when king Zedekiah sent to him Pashhur the son of Malchijah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, saying,
Inquire, I pray thee, of Jehovah for us. For Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon makes war against us. Perhaps Jehovah will deal with us according to all his wondrous works, that he may go up from us.
Behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands, with which ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against the Chaldeans who besiege you, outside the walls. And I will gather them into the midst of this city.
And I myself will fight against you with an outstretched hand and with a strong arm, even in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation.
And I will smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast. They shall die of a great pestilence.
And afterward, says Jehovah, I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants, and the people, even such as are left in this city from the pestilence, from the sword, and from the famine, into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek their life, and he shall smite them with the edge of the sword. He shall not spare them, nor have pity, nor have mercy.
Behold, I set before you the way of life and the way of death.
He who abides in this city shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence. But he who goes out, and passes over to the Chaldeans who besiege you, he shall live, and his life shall be to him for a prey.
For I have set my face upon this city for evil, and not for good, says Jehovah. It shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.
And concerning the house of the king of Judah, hear ye the word of Jehovah.
Execute justice in the morning, and deliver him who is robbed out of the hand of the oppressor, lest my wrath go forth like fire, and burn so that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.
Behold, I am against thee, O inhabitant of the valley, and of the rock of the plain, says Jehovah, you who say, Who shall come down against us? Or who shall enter into our habitations?
And I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings, says Jehovah. And I will kindle a fire in her forest, and it shall devour all that is round about her.

Go down to the house of the king of Judah, and speak there this word,
and say, Hear the word of Jehovah, O king of Judah, who sits upon the throne of David, thou, and thy servants, and thy people who enter in by these gates.
Execute ye justice and righteousness. And deliver him who is robbed out of the hand of the oppressor. And do no wrong. Do no violence to the sojourner, the fatherless, nor the widow, neither shed innocent blood in this place.
For if ye do this thing indeed, then there shall enter in by the gates of this house kings sitting upon the throne of David, riding in chariots and on horses, he, and his servants, and his people.
But if ye will not hear these words, I swear by myself, says Jehovah, that this house shall become a desolation.
Thou are Gilead to me, and the head of Lebanon, yet surely I will make thee a wilderness, cities which are not inhabited.
And I will prepare destroyers against thee, each one with his weapons, and they shall cut down thy choice cedars, and cast them into the fire.
And many nations shall pass by this city, and they shall say each man to his neighbor, Why has Jehovah done thus to this great city?
Then they shall answer, Because they forsook the covenant of Jehovah their God, and worshiped other gods, and served them.
Weep ye not for him who is dead, nor bemoan him. But weep greatly for him who goes away, for he shall return no more, nor see his native country.
He shall not return there any more.
But in the place where they have led him captive, there he shall die, and he shall see this land no more.
Woe to him who builds his house by unrighteousness, and his chambers by injustice, who uses his neighbor's service without wages, and gives him not his hire,
who says, I will build me a wide house and spacious chambers, and cuts out windows for himself, and it is overlaid with cedar, and painted with vermilion.
Shall thou reign, because thou strive to excel in cedar? Did not thy father eat and drink, and do justice and righteousness? Then it was well with him.
He judged the cause of the poor and needy man, then it was well. Was not this to know me? says Jehovah.
But thine eyes and thy heart are not but for thy covetousness, and for shedding innocent blood, and for oppression, and for violence, to do it.
Therefore thus says Jehovah concerning Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah. They shall not lament for him, saying, Ah my brother! or, Ah sister! They shall not lament for him, saying Ah lord! or, Ah his glory!
He shall be buried with the burial of a donkey, drawn and cast forth beyond the gates of Jerusalem.
Go up to Lebanon, and cry. And lift up thy voice in Bashan, and cry from Abarim. For all thy lovers are destroyed.
I spoke to thee in thy prosperity, but thou said, I will not hear. This has been thy manner from thy youth, that thou obeyed not my voice.
The wind shall feed all thy shepherds, and thy loved ones shall go into captivity. Surely then thou shall be ashamed and confounded for all thy wickedness.
O inhabitant of Lebanon, who makes thy nest in the cedars, how greatly to be pitied thou shall be when pangs come upon thee, the pain as of a woman in travail!
As I live, says Jehovah, though Coniah the son of Jehoiakim king of Judah were the signet upon my right hand, yet I would pluck thee from there,
and I will give thee into the hand of those who seek thy life, and into the hand of those of whom thou are afraid, even into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of the Chaldeans.
And I will cast thee out, and thy mother who bore thee, into another country where ye were not born, and there ye shall die.
But to the land to which their soul longs to return, there they shall not return.
Is this man Coniah a despised broken vessel? Is he a vessel in which none delights? Why are they cast out, he and his seed, and are cast into the land which they know not?
O earth, earth, earth, hear the word of Jehovah.
Write ye this man childless, a man who shall not prosper in his days. For no more shall a man of his seed prosper, sitting upon the throne of David, and ruling in Judah.

Woe to the shepherds who destroy and scatter the sheep of my pasture! says Jehovah.
Ye have scattered my flock, and driven them away, and have not visited them. Behold, I will visit upon you the evil of your doings, says Jehovah.
And I will gather the remnant of my flock out of all the countries where I have driven them, and will bring them again to their folds, and they shall be fruitful and multiply.
And I will set up shepherds over them who shall feed them. And they shall fear no more, nor be dismayed. Neither shall any be lacking, says Jehovah.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will raise to David a righteous Branch, and he shall reign as king and deal wisely, and shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.
Jehovah our righteousness.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that they shall no more say, As Jehovah lives, who brought up the sons of Israel out of the land of Egypt,
but, As Jehovah lives, who brought up and who led the seed of the house of Israel out of the north country, and from all the countries where I had driven them. And they shall dwell in their own land.
My heart within me is broken. All my bones shake. I am like a drunken man, and like a man whom wine has overcome, because of Jehovah, and because of his holy words.
For the land is full of adulterers. For because of swearing the land mourns. The pastures of the wilderness are dried up. And their course is evil, and their might is not right.
For both prophet and priest are profane. Yea, in my house I have found their wickedness, says Jehovah.
Therefore their way shall be to them as slippery places in the darkness. They shall be driven on, and fall in it. For I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, says Jehovah.
And I have seen folly in the prophets of Samaria. They prophesied by Baal, and caused my people Israel to err.
In the prophets of Jerusalem also I have seen a horrible thing. They commit adultery, and walk in lies. And they strengthen the hands of evildoers, so that none returns from his wickedness. They have all of them become to me as Sodom, and the inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah.
Behold, I will feed them with wormwood, and make them drink the water of gall. For from the prophets of Jerusalem ungodliness has gone forth into all the land.
Hearken not to the words of the prophets who prophesy to you. They teach you vanity. They speak a vision of their own heart, and not out of the mouth of Jehovah.
They say continually to those who despise me, Jehovah has said, Ye shall have peace. And to everyone who walks in the stubbornness of his own heart they say, No evil shall come upon you.
For who has stood in the council of Jehovah, that he should perceive and hear his word? Who has marked my word, and heard it?
Behold, the tempest of Jehovah, wrath, has gone forth, yea, a whirling tempest. It shall burst upon the head of the wicked.
The anger of Jehovah shall not return until he has executed, and till he has performed the intents of his heart. In the latter days ye shall understand it perfectly.
I did not send these prophets, yet they ran. I did not speak to them, yet they prophesied.
But if they had stood in my council, then they would have caused my people to hear my words, and would have turned them from their evil way, and from the evil of their doings.
Am I a God at hand, says Jehovah, and not a God afar off?
Can any man hide himself in secret places so that I shall not see him? says Jehovah. Do I not fill heaven and earth? says Jehovah.
I have heard what the prophets have said, who prophesy lies in my name, saying, I have dreamed, I have dreamed.
How long shall this be in the heart of the prophets who prophesy lies, even the prophets of the deceit of their own heart?
Who think to cause my people to forget my name by their dreams which they tell every man to his neighbor, as their fathers forgot my name for Baal.
The prophet who has a dream, let him tell a dream. And he who has my word, let him speak my word faithfully. What is the straw to the wheat? says Jehovah.
Is not my word like fire? says Jehovah, and like a hammer that breaks the rock in pieces?
Therefore, behold, I am against the prophets, says Jehovah, who steal my words each one from his neighbor.
Behold, I am against the prophets, says Jehovah, who use their tongues, and say, He says.
Behold, I am against those who prophesy lying dreams, says Jehovah, and tell them. And cause my people to err by their lies, and by their vain boasting. Yet I sent them not, nor commanded them, neither do they profit this people at all, says Jehovah.
And when this people, or the prophet, or a priest, shall ask thee, saying, What is the burden of Jehovah? Then thou shall say to them, What burden! I will cast you off, says Jehovah.
And as for the prophet, and the priest, and the people, who shall say, The burden of Jehovah, I will even punish that man and his house.
What has Jehovah answered? and, What has Jehovah spoken?
And the burden of Jehovah ye shall mention no more, for every man's own word shall be his burden. For ye have perverted the words of the living God, of Jehovah of hosts our God.
What has Jehovah answered thee? and, What has Jehovah spoken?
Because ye say this word, The burden of Jehovah, and I have sent to you, saying, Ye shall not say, The burden of Jehovah,
therefore, behold, I will utterly forget you. And I will cast you off, and the city that I gave to you and to your fathers, away from my presence.
And I will bring an everlasting reproach upon you, and a perpetual shame, which shall not be forgotten.

Jehovah showed me, and, behold, two baskets of figs set before the temple of Jehovah, after Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon had carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, and the rulers of Judah, with the craftsmen and smiths, from Jerusalem, and had brought them to Babylon.
One basket had very good figs, like the figs that are first ripe, and the other basket had very bad figs, which could not be eaten they were so bad.
Then Jehovah said to me, What do thou see, Jeremiah? And I said, Figs. The good figs, very good, and the bad, very bad, that cannot be eaten they are so bad.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Like these good figs, so I will regard the captives of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans, for good.
For I will set my eyes upon them for good, and I will bring them again to this land. And I will build them, and not pull them down, and I will plant them, and not pluck them up.
And I will give them a heart to know me, that I am Jehovah. And they shall be my people, and I will be their God, for they shall return to me with their whole heart.
So will I give up Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his rulers, and the residue of Jerusalem, who remain in this land, and those who dwell in the land of Egypt.
I will even give them up to be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth for evil, to be a reproach and a proverb, a taunt and a curse, in all places where I shall drive them.
And I will send the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, among them, till they be consumed from off the land that I gave to them and to their fathers.

The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the people of Judah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah (the same was the first year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon),
which Jeremiah the prophet spoke to all the people of Judah, and to all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, saying,
From the thirteenth year of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah, even to this day, these twenty-three years, the word of Jehovah has come to me, and I have spoken to you, rising up early and speaking. But ye have not hearkened.
And Jehovah has sent to you all his servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them, (but ye have not hearkened, nor inclined your ear to hear),
saying, Return ye now each one from his evil way, and from the evil of your doings, and dwell in the land that Jehovah has given to you and to your fathers, from of old and even for evermore.
And go not after other gods to serve them, and to worship them, and provoke me not to anger with the work of your hands. And I will do you no hurt.
Yet ye have not hearkened to me, says Jehovah, that ye may provoke me to anger with the work of your hands to your own hurt.
Because ye have not heard my words,
behold, I will send and take all the families of the north, says Jehovah, and Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will bring them against this land, and against the inhabitants of it, and against all these nations round about. And I will utterly destroy them, and make them an astonishment, and a hissing, and perpetual desolations.
Moreover I will take from them the voice of mirth and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the sound of the millstones, and the light of the lamp.
And this whole land shall be a desolation, and an astonishment. And these nations shall serve the king of Babylon seventy years.
And it shall come to pass, when seventy years are accomplished, that I will punish the king of Babylon, and that nation, says Jehovah, for their iniquity, and the land of the Chaldeans, and I will make it desolate forever.
And I will bring upon that land all my words which I have pronounced against it, even all that is written in this book, which Jeremiah has prophesied against all the nations.
For many nations and great kings shall make bondmen of them, even of them, and I will recompense them according to their deeds, and according to the work of their hands.
Take this cup of the wine of wrath at my hand, and cause all the nations, to whom I send thee, to drink it.
And they shall drink, and reel to and fro, and be mad, because of the sword that I will send among them.
Jerusalem, and the cities of Judah, and the kings of it, and the rulers of it, to make them a desolation, an astonishment, a hissing, and a curse, as it is this day,
Pharaoh king of Egypt, and his servants, and his rulers, and all his people,
and all the mixed people, and all the kings of the land of the Uz, and all the kings of the Philistines, and Ashkelon, and Gaza, and Ekron, and the remnant of Ashdod,
Edom, and Moab, and the sons of Ammon,
and all the kings of Tyre, and all the kings of Sidon, and the kings of the isle which is beyond the sea,
Dedan, and Tema, and Buz, and all who have the corners of their hair cut off,
and all the kings of Arabia, and all the kings of the mixed people who dwell in the wilderness,
and all the kings of Zimri, and all the kings of Elam, and all the kings of the Medes,
and all the kings of the north, far and near, one with another, and all the kingdoms of the world, which are upon the face of the earth. And the king of Sheshach shall drink after them.
Drink ye, and be drunken, and spew, and fall, and rise no more, because of the sword which I will send among you.
Ye shall surely drink.
For, lo, I begin to work evil at the city which is called by my name, and should ye be utterly unpunished? Ye shall not be unpunished. For I will call for a sword upon all the inhabitants of the earth, says Jehovah of hosts.
Therefore prophesy thou against them all these words, and say to them, Jehovah will roar from on high, and utter his voice from his holy habitation. He will mightily roar against his fold. He will give a shout, as those who tread grapes, against all the inhabitants of the earth.
A noise shall come even to the end of the earth, for Jehovah has a controversy with the nations. He will enter into judgment with all flesh. As for the wicked, he will give them to the sword, says Jehovah.
Behold, evil shall go forth from nation to nation, and a great tempest shall be raised up from the outermost parts of the earth.
And the slain of Jehovah shall be at that day from one end of the earth even to the other end of the earth. They shall not be lamented, nor gathered, nor buried; they shall be dung upon the face of the ground.
Wail, ye shepherds, and cry. And wallow, ye principal men of the flock. For the days of your slaughter and of your dispersions have fully come, and ye shall fall like a goodly vessel.
And the shepherds shall have no way to flee, nor the principal men of the flock to escape.
A voice of the cry of the shepherds, and the wailing of the principal men of the flock! For Jehovah lays waste their pasture.
And the peaceable folds are brought to silence because of the fierce anger of Jehovah.
He has left his covert as the lion. For their land has become an astonishment because of the fierceness of the oppressing sword, and because of his fierce anger.

In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word from Jehovah came, saying,
Stand in the court of Jehovah's house, and speak to all the cities of Judah, which come to worship in Jehovah's house, all the words that I command thee to speak to them, diminish not a word.
It may be they will hearken, and turn every man from his evil way, that I may relent of the evil which I purpose to do to them because of the evil of their doings.
If ye will not hearken to me, to walk in my law, which I have set before you,
to hearken to the words of my servants the prophets, whom I send to you, even rising up early and sending them, but ye have not hearkened,
then I will make this house like Shiloh, and will make this city a curse to all the nations of the earth.
And the priests and the prophets and all the people heard Jeremiah speaking these words in the house of Jehovah.
And it came to pass, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking all that Jehovah had commanded him to speak to all the people, that the priests and the prophets and all the people laid hold on him, saying, Thou shall surely die.
Why have thou prophesied in the name of Jehovah, saying, This house shall be like Shiloh, and this city shall be desolate, without inhabitant? And all the people were gathered to Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah.
And when the rulers of Judah heard these things, they came up from the king's house to the house of Jehovah, and they sat in the entry of the new gate of Jehovah's house.
Then the priests and the prophets spoke to the rulers and to all the people, saying, This man is worthy of death, for he has prophesied against this city, as ye have heard with your ears.
Then Jeremiah spoke to all the rulers and to all the people, saying, Jehovah sent me to prophesy against this house and against this city all the words that ye have heard.
Now therefore amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of Jehovah your God, and Jehovah will relent of the evil that he has pronounced against you.
But as for me, behold, I am in your hand. Do with me as is good and right in your eyes.
Only know ye for certain that, if ye put me to death, ye will bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the inhabitants of it. For of a truth Jehovah has sent me to you to speak all these words in your ears.
Then the rulers and all the people said to the priests and to the prophets. This man is not worthy of death, for he has spoken to us in the name of Jehovah our God.
Then certain of the elders of the land rose up, and spoke to all the assembly of the people, saying,
Zion shall be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.
Did Hezekiah king of Judah, and all Judah put him to death? Did he not fear Jehovah, and entreat the favor of Jehovah. And Jehovah relented of the evil which he had pronounced against them? Thus might we commit great evil against our own souls.
And there was also a man who prophesied in the name of Jehovah, Uriah the son of Shemaiah of Kiriath-jearim. And he prophesied against this city and against this land according to all the words of Jeremiah.
And when Jehoiakim the king, with all his mighty men, and all the rulers, heard his words, the king sought to put him to death, but when Uriah heard it, he was afraid, and fled, and went into Egypt.
And Jehoiakim the king sent men into Egypt, namely, Elnathan the son of Achbor, and certain men with him, into Egypt,
and they fetched forth Uriah out of Egypt, and brought him to Jehoiakim the king, who killed him with the sword, and cast his dead body into the graves of the common people.
But the hand of Ahikam the son of Shaphan was with Jeremiah, that they should not give him into the hand of the people to put him to death.

In the beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Make thee bonds and bars, and put them upon thy neck.
And send them to the king of Edom, and to the king of Moab, and to the king of the sons of Ammon, and to the king of Tyre, and to the king of Sidon, by the hand of the messengers who come to Jerusalem to Zedekiah king of Judah.
I have made the earth, the men and the beasts that are upon the face of the earth, by my great power and by my outstretched arm, and I give it to whom it seems right to me.
And now I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon, my servant. And the beasts of the field I have also given him to serve him.
And all the nations shall serve him, and his son, and his son's son, until the time of his own land comes. And then many nations and great kings shall make him their bondman.
And it shall come to pass, that the nation and the kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and that will not put their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, that nation I will punish, says Jehovah, with the sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, until I have consumed them by his hand.
But as for you, hearken ye not to your prophets, nor to your diviners, nor to your dreams, nor to your soothsayers, nor to your sorcerers, who speak to you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon.
For they prophesy a lie to you, to remove you far from your land, and that I should drive you out, and ye should perish.
But the nation that shall bring their neck under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him, that nation I will let remain in their own land, says Jehovah, and they shall till it, and dwell therein.
And I spoke to Zedekiah king of Judah according to all these words, saying, Bring your necks under the yoke of the king of Babylon, and serve him and his people, and live.
Why will ye die, thou and thy people, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, as Jehovah has spoken concerning the nation that will not serve the king of Babylon?
And hearken not to the words of the prophets who speak to you, saying, Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon, for they prophesy a lie to you.
For I have not sent them, says Jehovah, but they prophesy falsely in my name, that I may drive you out, and that ye may perish, ye, and the prophets who prophesy to you.
Hearken not to the words of your prophets who prophesy to you, saying, Behold, the vessels of Jehovah's house shall now shortly be brought again from Babylon, for they prophesy a lie to you.
Hearken not to them. Serve the king of Babylon, and live. Why should this city become a desolation?
But if they are prophets, and if the word of Jehovah is with them, let them now make intercession to Jehovah of hosts, that the vessels which are left in the house of Jehovah, and in the house of the king of Judah, and at Jerusalem, not go to Babylon.
For thus says Jehovah of hosts concerning the pillars, and concerning the sea, and concerning the stands, and concerning the residue of the vessels that are left in this city,
which Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon did not take when he carried away captive Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, from Jerusalem to Babylon, and all the nobles of Judah and Jerusalem.
They shall be carried to Babylon, and there they shall be until the day that I visit them, says Jehovah. Then I will bring them up, and restore them to this place.

And it came to pass the same year, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the fourth year, in the fifth month, that Hananiah the son of Azzur, the prophet, who was of Gibeon, spoke to me in the house of Jehovah, in the presence of the priests and of all the people, saying,
Thus speaks Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, I have broken the yoke of the king of Babylon.
Within two full years I will bring again into this place all the vessels of Jehovah's house that Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon took away from this place, and carried to Babylon.
And I will bring again to this place Jeconiah the son of Jehoiakim, king of Judah, with all the captives of Judah, who went to Babylon, says Jehovah, for I will break the yoke of the king of Babylon.
Then the prophet Jeremiah said to the prophet Hananiah in the presence of the priests, and in the presence of all the people who stood in the house of Jehovah,
even the prophet Jeremiah said, Truly! Jehovah do so. Jehovah perform thy words which thou have prophesied, to bring again the vessels of Jehovah's house, and all those of the captivity, from Babylon to this place.
The prophets who have been before me and before thee of old prophesied against many countries, and against great kingdoms, of war, and of evil, and of pestilence.
The prophet who prophesies of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to pass, then the prophet shall be known that Jehovah has truly sent him.
Then Hananiah the prophet took the bar from off the prophet Jeremiah's neck, and broke it.
Even so I will break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon within two full years from off the neck of all the nations. And the prophet Jeremiah went his way.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah after Hananiah the prophet had broken the bar from off the neck of the prophet Jeremiah, saying,
Thou have broken the bars of wood, but I have made in their stead bars of iron.
I have put a yoke of iron upon the neck of all these nations, that they may served Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and they shall serve him. And I have given him the beasts of the field also.
Then the prophet Jeremiah said to Hananiah the prophet, Hear now, Hananiah. Jehovah has not sent thee, but thou make this people to trust in a lie.
Therefore thus says Jehovah, Behold, I will send thee away from off the face of the earth. This year thou shall die because thou have spoken rebellion against Jehovah.
So Hananiah the prophet died the same year in the seventh month.

Now these are the words of the letter that Jeremiah the prophet sent from Jerusalem to the residue of the elders of the captivity, and to the priests, and to the prophets, and to all the people, whom Nebuchadnezzar had carried away captive from Jerusalem to Babylon,
(after Jeconiah the king, and the queen-mother, and the eunuchs, and the rulers of Judah and Jerusalem, and the craftsmen, and the smiths, were departed from Jerusalem),
by the hand of Elasah the son of Shaphan, and Gemariah the son of Hilkiah, (whom Zedekiah king of Judah sent to Babylon to Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon), saying,
Build ye houses, and dwell in them, and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them.
Take ye wives, and beget sons and daughters. And take wives for your sons, and give your daughters to husbands, that they may bear sons and daughters, and multiply ye there, and be not diminished.
And seek the peace of the city where I have caused you to be carried away captive, and pray to Jehovah for it, for in the peace of it ye shall have peace.
Let not your prophets who are in the midst of you, and your diviners, deceive you, nor hearken ye to your dreams which ye cause to be dreamed.
For they prophesy falsely to you in my name. I have not sent them, says Jehovah.
For thus says Jehovah, After seventy years are accomplished for Babylon, I will visit you, and perform my good word toward you in causing you to return to this place.
For I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says Jehovah, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you hope in your latter end.
And ye shall call upon me, and ye shall go and pray to me, and I will hearken to you.
And ye shall seek me, and find me when ye shall search for me with all your heart.
And I will be found by you, says Jehovah, and I will turn again your captivity. And I will gather you from all the nations, and from all the places where I have driven you, says Jehovah, and I will bring you again to the place from where I caused you to be carried away captive.
Because ye have said, Jehovah has raised us up prophets in Babylon,
thus says Jehovah concerning the king who sits upon the throne of David, and concerning all the people who dwell in this city, your brothers who have not gone forth with you into captivity,
Behold, I will send upon them the sword, the famine, and the pestilence, and will make them like vile figs, that cannot be eaten they are so bad.
And I will pursue after them with the sword, with the famine, and with the pestilence, and will deliver them to be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth, to be an execration, and an astonishment, and a hissing, and a reproach, among all the nations where I have driven them,
because they have not hearkened to my words, says Jehovah, with which I sent to them my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them. But ye would not hear, says Jehovah.
Hear ye therefore the word of Jehovah, all ye of the captivity whom I have sent away from Jerusalem to Babylon.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, concerning Ahab the son of Kolaiah, and concerning Zedekiah the son of Maaseiah, who prophesy a lie to you in my name. Behold, I will deliver them into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall kill them before your eyes.
And of them shall be taken up a curse by all the captives of Judah that are in Babylon, saying, Jehovah make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab, whom the king of Babylon roasted in the fire,
because they have wrought folly in Israel, and have committed adultery with their neighbors' wives, and have spoken words in my name falsely, which I did not command them. And I am he who knows, and am witness, says Jehovah.
And concerning Shemaiah the Nehelamite thou shall speak, saying,
Thus speaks Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, Because thou have sent letters in thine own name to all the people who are at Jerusalem, and to Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, and to all the priests, saying,
Jehovah has made thee priest in the stead of Jehoiada the priest, that there may be officers in the house of Jehovah, for every man who is mad, and makes himself a prophet, that thou should put him in the stocks and in shackles.
Now therefore, why have thou not rebuked Jeremiah of Anathoth, who makes himself a prophet to you,
inasmuch as he has sent to us in Babylon, saying, It is long. Build ye houses, and dwell in them, and plant gardens, and eat the fruit of them?
And Zephaniah the priest read this letter in the ears of Jeremiah the prophet.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
Because Shemaiah has prophesied to you, and I did not send him, and he has caused you to trust in a lie,
Behold, I will punish Shemaiah the Nehelamite, and his seed. He shall not have a man to dwell among this people, nor shall he behold the good that I will do to my people, says Jehovah, because he has spoken rebellion against Jehovah.

The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Thus speaks Jehovah, the God of Israel, saying, Write thee all the words that I have spoken to thee in a book.
For, lo, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will turn again the captivity of my people Israel and Judah, says Jehovah, and I will cause them to return to the land that I gave to their fathers, and they shall possess it.
And these are the words that Jehovah spoke concerning Israel and concerning Judah.
We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace.
Ask ye now, and see whether a man travails with child. Why do I see every man with his hands on his loins as a woman in travail, and all faces are turned into paleness?
Alas! For that day is great, so that none is like it. It is even the time of Jacob's trouble, but he shall be saved out of it.
And it shall come to pass in that day, says Jehovah of hosts, that I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and will burst thy bonds. And strangers shall no more make him their bondman,
but they shall serve Jehovah their God, and David their king, whom I will raise up to them.
Therefore fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, says Jehovah, nor be dismayed, O Israel. For, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity, and Jacob shall return, and shall be quiet and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.
For I am with thee, says Jehovah, to save thee. For I will make a full end of all the nations where I have scattered thee, but I will not make a full end of thee. But I will correct thee in measure, and will in no way leave thee unpunished.
For thus says Jehovah, Thy hurt is incurable, and thy wound grievous.
There is none to plead thy cause, that thou may be bound up; thou have no healing medicines.
All who love thee have forgotten thee; they seek thee not. For I have wounded thee with the wound of an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one, for the greatness of thine iniquity, because thy sins were increased.
Why do thou cry for thy hurt? Thy pain is incurable, for the greatness of thine iniquity. Because thy sins were increased, I have done these things to thee.
Therefore all those who devour thee shall be devoured, and all thine adversaries, every one of them, shall go into captivity. And those who despoil thee shall be a spoil, and all who prey upon thee I will give for a prey.
For I will restore health to thee, and I will heal thee of thy wounds, says Jehovah, because they have called thee an outcast, saying, It is Zion, whom no man seeks after.
Behold, I will turn again the captivity of Jacob's tents, and have compassion on his dwelling-places. And the city shall be built upon its own hill, and the palace shall be inhabited after its own manner.
And out of them shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of those who make merry. And I will multiply them, and they shall not be few. I will also glorify them, and they shall not be small.
Their sons also shall be as formerly, and their congregation shall be established before me. And I will punish all who oppress them.
And their prince shall be of themselves, and their ruler shall proceed from the midst of them. And I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach to me. For who is he who has had boldness to approach to me? says Jehovah.
And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.
Behold, the tempest of Jehovah-wrath-has gone forth, a sweeping tempest. It shall burst upon the head of the wicked.
The fierce anger of Jehovah shall not return until he has executed, and till he has performed the intents of his heart. In the latter days ye shall understand it.

At that time, says Jehovah, I will be the God of all the families of Israel, and they shall be my people.
The people who were left of the sword found favor in the wilderness, even Israel, when I went to cause him to rest.
Jehovah appeared of old to me, saying, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love. Therefore with loving kindness I have drawn thee.
Again I will build thee, and thou shall be built, O virgin of Israel. Again thou shall be adorned with thy tambourine, and shall go forth in the dances of those who make merry.
Again thou shall plant vineyards upon the mountains of Samaria. The planters shall plant, and shall enjoy it.
For there shall be a day that the watchmen upon the hills of Ephraim shall cry, Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion to Jehovah our God.
Sing with gladness for Jacob, and shout for the chief of the nations. Publish ye, praise ye, and say, O Jehovah, save thy people, the remnant of Israel.
Behold, I will bring them from the north country, and gather them from the outermost parts of the earth, and with them the blind man and the lame man, the woman with child, and she who travails with child together. They shall return here a great company.
They shall come with weeping. And I will lead them with supplications. I will cause them to walk by rivers of waters, in a straight way in which they shall not stumble. For I am a father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn.
Hear the word of Jehovah, O ye nations, and declare it in the isles afar off, and say, He who scattered Israel will gather him, and keep him, as a shepherd does his flock.
For Jehovah has ransomed Jacob, and redeemed him from the hand of him who was stronger than he.
And they shall come and sing in the height of Zion, and shall flow to the goodness of Jehovah, to the grain, and to the new wine, and to the oil, and to the young of the flock and of the herd. And their soul shall be as a watered garden, and they shall not sorrow any more at all.
Then the virgin shall rejoice in the dance, and the young men and the old together, for I will turn their mourning into joy, and will comfort them, and make them rejoice from their sorrow.
And I will satiate the soul of the priests with fatness, and my people shall be satisfied with my goodness, says Jehovah.
A voice is heard in Ramah, lamentation, and bitter weeping. Rachel weeping for her children, she refused to be comforted for her children, because they are not.
Refrain thy voice from weeping, and thine eyes from tears, for thy work shall be rewarded, says Jehovah, and they shall come again from the land of the enemy.
And there is hope for thy latter end, says Jehovah, and thy sons shall come again to their own border.
I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself saying, Thou have chastised me, and I was chastised as a calf unaccustomed to the yoke. Turn thou me back, and I shall be turned back, for thou are Jehovah my God.
Surely after that I was turned back. I repented, and after I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh. I was ashamed, yea, even confounded, because I bore the reproach of my youth.
Is Ephraim my dear son? Is he a darling child? For as often as I speak against him, I do earnestly remember him still. Therefore my heart yearns for him. I will surely have mercy upon him, says Jehovah.
Set thee up road marks. Make thee guideposts. Set thy heart toward the highway, even the way by which thou went. Turn again, O virgin of Israel, turn again to these thy cities.
a woman shall encompass a man.
Jehovah bless thee, O habitation of righteousness, O mountain of holiness.
And Judah and all the cities thereof shall dwell in there together, the husbandmen, and those who go about with flocks.
For I have satiated the weary soul, and every sorrowful soul I have replenished.
Upon this I awoke, and beheld, and my sleep was sweet to me.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the seed of man, and with the seed of beast.
And it shall come to pass that, just as I have watched over them to pluck up and to break down and to overthrow and to destroy and to afflict, so I will watch over them to build and to plant, says Jehovah.
In those days they shall no more say, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the son's teeth are set on edge.
But everyone shall die for his own iniquity. Every man who eats the sour grapes, his teeth shall be set on edge.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah,
not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day that I took them by the hand to bring them out of the land of Egypt, because they did not continue in my covenant, and I disregarded them, says Jehovah.
I will give my laws into their mind, and I will write them on their hearts. And I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
And they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know Jehovah, for they shall all know me, from the least of them to the greatest of them, says Jehovah. For I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.
Thus says Jehovah, who gives the sun for a light by day, and the ordinances of the moon and of the stars for a light by night, who stirs up the sea, so that the waves thereof roar. Jehovah of hosts is his name.
If these ordinances depart from before me, says Jehovah, then the seed of Israel also shall cease from being a nation before me forever.
If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, then I will also cast off all the seed of Israel for all that they have done, says Jehovah.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that the city shall be built to Jehovah from the tower of Hananel to the gate of the corner.
And the measuring line shall go out further straight onward to the hill Gareb, and shall turn about to Goah.
And the whole valley of the dead bodies and of the ashes, and all the fields, to the brook Kidron, to the corner of the horse gate toward the east, shall be holy to Jehovah. It shall not be plucked up, nor thrown down any more forever.

The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the tenth year of Zedekiah, king of Judah, which was the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar.
Now at that time the king of Babylon's army was besieging Jerusalem, and Jeremiah the prophet was shut up in the court of the guard, which was in the king of Judah's house.
Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.
And Zedekiah king of Judah shall not escape out of the hand of the Chaldeans, but shall surely be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon, and shall speak with him mouth to mouth, and his eyes shall behold his eyes.
And he shall bring Zedekiah to Babylon, and there he shall be until I visit him, says Jehovah. Though ye fight with the Chaldeans, ye shall not prosper?
And Jeremiah said, The word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Behold, Hanamel the son of Shallum thine uncle shall come to thee, saying, Buy thee my field that is in Anathoth. For the right of redemption is thine to buy it.
So Hanamel my uncle's son came to me in the court of the guard according to the word of Jehovah, and said to me, Buy my field, I pray thee, that is in Anathoth, which is in the land of Benjamin. For the right of inheritance is thine, and the redemption is thine. Buy it for thyself. Then I knew that this was the word of Jehovah.
And I bought the field that was in Anathoth of Hanamel my uncle's son, and weighed him the money, even seventeen shekels of silver.
And I signed the deed, and sealed it, and called witnesses, and weighed him the money in the balances.
So I took the deed of the purchase, both that which was sealed, according to the law and custom, and that which was open,
and I delivered the deed of the purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, in the presence of Hanamel my uncle's son, and in the presence of the witnesses who signed the deed of the purchase, before all the Jews who sat in the court of the guard.
And I charged Baruch before them, saying,
Take these deeds, this deed of the purchase which is sealed, and this deed which is open, and put them in an earthen vessel that they may continue many days.
Houses and fields and vineyards shall yet again be bought in this land.
Now after I had delivered the deed of the purchase to Baruch the son of Neriah, I prayed to Jehovah, saying,
Ah lord Jehovah! Behold, thou have made the heavens and the earth by thy great power and by thine outstretched arm. There is nothing too hard for thee,
who show loving kindness to thousands, and recompense the iniquity of the fathers into the bosom of their sons after them, the great, the mighty God. Jehovah of hosts is his name,
great in counsel, and mighty in work, whose eyes are open upon all the ways of the sons of men, to give everyone according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings,
who set signs and wonders in the land of Egypt, even to this day, both in Israel and among other men, and made thee a name, as at this day,
and brought forth thy people Israel out of the land of Egypt with signs, and with wonders, and with a strong hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with great terror,
and gave them this land, which thou swore to their fathers to give them, a land flowing with milk and honey.
And they came in, and possessed it, but they obeyed not thy voice, nor walked in thy law. They have done nothing of all that thou commanded them to do. Therefore thou have caused all this evil to come upon them.
Behold, the mounds. They have come to the city to take it. And the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans who fight against it, because of the sword, and of the famine, and of the pestilence. And what thou have spoken has come to pass, and, behold, thou see it.
And thou have said to me, O lord Jehovah, Buy thee the field for money, and call witnesses, whereas the city is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
Behold, I am Jehovah, the God of all flesh. Is there anything too hard for me?
Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the Chaldeans, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall take it.
And the Chaldeans, who fight against this city, shall come and set this city on fire, and burn it, with the houses upon whose roofs they have offered incense to Baal, and poured out drink offerings to other gods, to provoke me to anger.
For the sons of Israel and the sons of Judah have done only that which was evil in my sight from their youth. For the sons of Israel have only provoked me to anger with the work of their hands, says Jehovah.
For this city has been to me a provocation of my anger and of my wrath from the day that they built it even to this day, that I should remove it from before my face,
because of all the evil of the sons of Israel and of the sons of Judah, which they have done to provoke me to anger, they, their kings, their rulers, their priests, and their prophets, and the men of Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And they have turned the back to me, and not the face. And though I taught them, rising up early and teaching them, yet they have not hearkened to receive instruction.
But they set their abominations in the house which is called by my name, to defile it.
And they built the high places of Baal, which are in the valley of the son of Hinnom, to cause their sons and their daughters to pass through the fire to Molech, which I did not command them, nor did it come into my mind, that they should do this abomination, to cause Judah to sin.
Behold, I will gather them out of all the countries where I have driven them in my anger, and in my wrath, and in great indignation. And I will bring them again to this place, and I will cause them to dwell safely.
And they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
And I will give them one heart and one way, that they may fear me forever, for the good of them, and of their sons after them.
And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I will not turn away from following them, to do them good. And I will put my fear in their hearts, that they may not depart from me.
Yea, I will rejoice over them to do them good. And I will plant them in this land assuredly with my whole heart and with my whole soul.
Just as I have brought all this great evil upon this people, so I will bring upon them all the good that I have promised them.
And fields shall be bought in this land, of which ye say, It is desolate, without man or beast. It is given into the hand of the Chaldeans.
Men shall buy fields for money, and sign the deeds, and seal them, and call witnesses, in the land of Benjamin, and in the places around Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, and in the cities of the hill-country, and in the cities of the lowland, and in the cities of the South. For I will cause their captivity to return, says Jehovah.

Moreover the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the second time, while he was yet shut up in the court of the guard, saying,
Call to me, and I will answer thee, and will show thee great things, and difficult, which thou know not.
For thus says Jehovah, the God of Israel, concerning the houses of this city, and concerning the houses of the kings of Judah, which are broken down to defend against the mounds and against the sword,
Behold, I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them. And I will reveal to them abundance of peace and truth.
And I will cause the captivity of Judah and the captivity of Israel to return, and will build them as at the first.
And I will cleanse them from all their iniquity by which they have sinned against me. And I will pardon all their iniquities by which they have sinned against me, and by which they have transgressed against me.
And this city shall be to me for a name of joy, for a praise and for a glory, before all the nations of the earth, which shall hear all the good that I do to them, and shall fear and tremble for all the good and for all the peace that I procure to it.
Yet again there shall be heard in this place-of which ye say, It is waste, without man and without beast, even in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, that are desolate, without man and without inhabitant and without beast-
the voice of joy and the voice of gladness, the voice of the bridegroom and the voice of the bride, the voice of those who say, Give thanks to Jehovah of hosts, for Jehovah is good, for his loving kindness is forever, and of those who bring thanksgiving into the house of Jehovah. For I will cause the captivity of the land to return as at the first, says Jehovah.
Yet again there shall be in this place, which is waste, without man and without beast, and in all the cities thereof, a habitation of shepherds causing their flocks to lie down.
In the cities of the hill-country, in the cities of the lowland, and in the cities of the South, and in the land of Benjamin, and in the places around Jerusalem, and in the cities of Judah, the flocks shall again pass under the hands of him who numbers them, says Jehovah.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will perform that good word which I have spoken concerning the house of Israel and concerning the house of Judah.
In those days, and at that time, I will cause a Branch of righteousness to grow up to David, and he shall execute justice and righteousness in the land.
Jehovah our righteousness.
David shall never want a man to sit upon the throne of the house of Israel,
neither shall the priests the Levites want a man before me to offer burnt offerings, and to burn meal offerings, and to do sacrifice continually.
And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
If ye can break my covenant of the day, and my covenant of the night, so that there shall not be day and night in their season,
then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant, that he shall not have a son to reign upon his throne, and with the Levites the priests, my ministers.
As the host of heaven cannot be numbered, neither the sand of the sea measured, so I will multiply the seed of David my servant, and the Levites that minister to me.
And the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
Consider thou not what this people have spoken, saying, The two families which Jehovah chose, he has cast them off? Thus they despise my people, that they should be no more a nation before them.
If my covenant of day and night stand not, if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth,
then I will also cast away the seed of Jacob, and of David my servant, so that I will not take of his seed to be rulers over the seed of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. For I will cause their captivity to return, and will have mercy on them.

The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, when Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon and all his army and all the kingdoms of the earth that were under his dominion, and all the peoples, were fighting against Jerusalem, and against all the cities thereof, saying,
Behold, I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall burn it with fire.
And thou shall not escape out of his hand, but shall surely be taken, and delivered into his hand. And thine eyes shall behold the eyes of the king of Babylon, and he shall speak with thee mouth to mouth, and thou shall go to Babylon.
Yet hear the word of Jehovah, O Zedekiah king of Judah. Thus says Jehovah concerning thee, Thou shall not die by the sword;
thou shall die in peace. And with the burnings of thy fathers, the former kings who were before thee, so shall they make a burning for thee. And they shall lament thee, saying, Ah lord! For I have spoken the word, says Jehovah.
Then Jeremiah the prophet spoke all these words to Zedekiah, king of Judah in Jerusalem,
when the king of Babylon's army was fighting against Jerusalem, and against all the cities of Judah that were left, against Lachish and against Azekah, for these alone remained of the cities of Judah, fortified cities.
The word that came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, after the king Zedekiah had made a covenant with all the people who were at Jerusalem, to proclaim liberty to them,
that every man should let his man-servant, and every man his maid-servant, who is a Hebrew or a Hebrewess, go free, that none should make bondmen of them, namely, of a Jew his brother.
And all the rulers and all the people obeyed, who had entered into the covenant, that everyone should let his man-servant, and everyone his maid-servant, go free, that none should make bondmen of them any more. They obeyed, and let them go.
But afterwards they turned, and caused the servants and the handmaids, whom they had let go free, to return, and brought them into subjection for servants and for handmaids.
Therefore the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
I made a covenant with your fathers in the day that I brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, saying,
At the end of seven years ye shall let go every man his brother who is a Hebrew, who has been sold to thee, and has served thee six years. Thou shall let him go free from thee. But your fathers hearkened not to me, nor inclined their ear.
And ye were now turned, and had done that which is right in my eyes, in proclaiming liberty every man to his neighbor. And ye had made a covenant before me in the house which is called by my name.
But ye turned and profaned my name, and caused every man his servant, and every man his handmaid, whom ye had let go free at their pleasure, to return. And ye brought them into subjection, to be to you for servants and for handmaids.
Ye have not hearkened to me, to proclaim liberty, every man to his brother, and every man to his neighbor. Behold, I proclaim to you a liberty, says Jehovah-to the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine. And I will make you to be tossed to and fro among all the kingdoms of the earth.
And I will give the men who have transgressed my covenant, who have not performed the words of the covenant which they made before me, when they cut the calf in two and passed between the parts of it,
the rulers of Judah, and the rulers of Jerusalem, the eunuchs, and the priests, and all the people of the land, who passed between the parts of the calf,
I will even give them into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek their life. And their dead bodies shall be for food to the birds of the heavens, and to the beasts of the earth.
And I will give Zedekiah king of Judah, and his rulers, into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those who seek their life, and into the hand of the king of Babylon's army that has gone away from you.
Behold, I will command, says Jehovah, and cause them to return to this city. And they shall fight against it, and take it, and burn it with fire. And I will make the cities of Judah a desolation, without inhabitant.

The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah in the days of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying,
Go to the house of the Rechabites, and speak to them, and bring them into the house of Jehovah, into one of the chambers, and give them wine to drink.
Then I took Jaazaniah the son of Jeremiah, the son of Habazziniah, and his brothers, and all his sons, and the whole house of the Rechabites.
And I brought them into the house of Jehovah, into the chamber of the sons of Hanan the son of Igdaliah, the man of God, which was by the chamber of the rulers, which was above the chamber of Maaseiah the son of Shallum, the keeper of the threshold.
And I set before the sons of the house of the Rechabites bowls full of wine, and cups, and I said to them, Drink ye wine.
But they said, We will drink no wine. For Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us, saying, Ye shall drink no wine, neither ye, nor your sons, forever.
Neither shall ye build house, nor sow seed, nor plant vineyard, nor have any, but all your days ye shall dwell in tents, that ye may live many days in the land in which ye sojourn.
And we have obeyed the voice of Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, in all that he charged us, to drink no wine all our days, we, our wives, our sons, or our daughters,
nor to build houses for us to dwell in. Neither have we vineyard, nor field, nor seed,
but we have dwelt in tents, and have obeyed, and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us.
But it came to pass, when Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came up into the land, that we said, Come, and let us go to Jerusalem for fear of the army of the Chaldeans, and for fear of the army of the Syrians. So we dwell at Jerusalem.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah, saying,
Go, and say to the men of Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, Will ye not receive instruction to hearken to my words? says Jehovah.
The words of Jonadab the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons, not to drink wine, are performed. And to this day they drink none, for they obey their father's commandment. But I have spoken to you, rising up early and speaking, and ye have not hearkened to me.
I have also sent to you all my servants the prophets, rising up early and sending them, saying, Return ye now every man from his evil way, and amend your doings, and go not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the land which I have given to you and to your fathers. But ye have not inclined your ear, nor hearkened to me.
Inasmuch as the sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the commandment of their father which he commanded them, but this people has not hearkened to me,
Behold, I will bring upon Judah and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem all the evil that I have pronounced against them, because I have spoken to them, but they have not heard, and I have called to them, but they have not answered.
Because ye have obeyed the commandment of Jonadab your father, and kept all his precepts, and done according to all that he commanded you,
Jonadab the son of Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me forever.

And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, that this word came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, saying,
Take thee a roll of a book, and write in it all the words that I have spoken to thee against Israel, and against Judah, and against all the nations, from the day I spoke to thee, from the days of Josiah, even to this day.
It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose to do to them, that they may return every man from his evil way, that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin.
Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah. And Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of Jehovah, which he had spoken to him, upon a roll of a book.
And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up. I cannot go into the house of Jehovah.
Therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou have written from my mouth, the words of Jehovah in the ears of the people in Jehovah's house upon the fast-day. And also thou shall read them in the ears of all Judah who come out of their cities.
It may be they will present their supplication before Jehovah, and will return each one from his evil way, for great is the anger and the wrath that Jehovah has pronounced against this people.
And Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the prophet commanded him, reading in the book the words of Jehovah in Jehovah's house.
Now it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, in the ninth month, that all the people in Jerusalem, and all the people who came from the cities of Judah to Jerusalem, proclaimed a fast before Jehovah.
Then Baruch read in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of Jehovah, in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan, the scribe, in the upper court, at the entry of the new gate of Jehovah's house, in the ears of all the people.
And when Micaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan, had heard out of the book all the words of Jehovah,
Elishama the scribe, and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah, and Elnathan the son of Achbor, and Gemariah the son of Shaphan, and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah, and all the rulers.
Then Micaiah declared to them all the words that he had heard when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people.
Therefore all the rulers sent Jehudi the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi, to Baruch, saying, Take in thy hand the roll from which thou have read in the ears of the people, and come. So Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand, and came to them.
And they said to him, Sit down now, and read it in our ears. So Baruch read it in their ears.
Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words, they turned in fear one toward another, and said to Baruch, We will surely tell the king of all these words.
And they asked Baruch, saying, Tell us now, How did thou write all these words at his mouth?
Then Baruch answered them, He pronounced all these words to me with his mouth, and I wrote them with ink in the book.
Then the rulers said to Baruch, Go, hide thee, thou and Jeremiah, and let no man know where ye are.
And they went in to the king into the court, but they had laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe, and they told all the words in the ears of the king.
So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll, and he took it out of the chamber of Elishama the scribe. And Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the rulers who stood beside the king.
Now the king was sitting in the winter-house in the ninth month, and the brazier was burning before him.
And it came to pass, when Jehudi had read three or four leaves, that the king cut it with the penknife, and cast it into the fire that was in the brazier, until all the roll was consumed in the fire that was in the brazier.
And they were not afraid, nor tore their garments, neither the king, nor any of his servants who heard all these words.
Moreover Elnathan and Delaiah and Gemariah had made intercession to the king that he would not burn the roll, but he would not hear them.
And the king commanded Jerahmeel the king's son, and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet, but Jehovah hid them.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah after the king had burned the roll, and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah, saying,
Take thee again another roll, and write in it all the former words that were in the first roll, which Jehoiakim the king of Judah has burned.
Thou have burned this roll, saying, Why have thou written in it, saying, The king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy this land, and shall cause to cease from there man and beast?
He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David. And his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the night to the frost.
And I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their iniquity. And I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced against them, but they did not hearken.
Then Jeremiah took another roll, and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah, who wrote in it from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burned in the fire, and there were added besides to them many like words.

And Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned as king, instead of Coniah the son of Jehoiakim, whom Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon made king in the land of Judah.
But neither he, nor his servants, nor the people of the land, hearkened to the words of Jehovah, which he spoke by the prophet Jeremiah.
And Zedekiah the king sent Jehucal the son of Shelemiah, and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah, the priest, to the prophet Jeremiah, saying, Pray now to Jehovah our God for us.
Now Jeremiah came in and went out among the people, for they had not put him into prison.
And Pharaoh's army came forth out of Egypt. And when the Chaldeans who were besieging Jerusalem heard news of them, they broke away from Jerusalem.
Then the word of Jehovah came to the prophet Jeremiah, saying,
Behold, Pharaoh's army, which has come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt into their own land.
And the Chaldeans shall come again, and fight against this city, and they shall take it, and burn it with fire.
Do not deceive yourselves, saying, The Chaldeans shall surely depart from us. For they shall not depart.
For though ye had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans who fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yea they would rise up every man in his tent, and burn this city with fire.
And it came to pass that, when the army of the Chaldeans was broken away from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's army,
then Jeremiah went forth out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin to receive his portion there in the midst of the people.
And when he was in the gate of Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah. And he laid hold on Jeremiah the prophet, saying, Thou are falling away to the Chaldeans.
Then Jeremiah said, It is false. I am not falling away to the Chaldeans. But he did not hearken to him. So Irijah laid hold on Jeremiah, and brought him to the rulers.
And the rulers were angry with Jeremiah, and smote him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe, for they had made that the prison.
When Jeremiah came into the dungeon-house, and into the cells, and Jeremiah had remained there many days,
then Zedekiah the king sent, and fetched him. And the king asked him secretly in his house, and said, Is there any word from Jehovah? And Jeremiah said, There is. He also said, Thou shall be delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon.
Moreover Jeremiah said to king Zedekiah, How have I sinned against thee, or against thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?
Where now are your prophets who prophesied to you, saying, The king of Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land?
And now hear, I pray thee, O my lord the king. Let my supplication, I pray thee, be presented before thee, that thou not cause me to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.
Then Zedekiah the king commanded, and they committed Jeremiah into the court of the guard. And they gave him a loaf of bread daily out of the bakers' street, until all the bread in the city was spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard.

And Shephatiah the son of Mattan, and Gedaliah the son of Pashhur, and Jucal the son of Shelemiah, and Pashhur the son of Malchijah, heard the words that Jeremiah spoke to all the people, saying,
He who abides in this city shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, but he who goes forth to the Chaldeans shall live, and his life shall be to him for a prey, and he shall live.
This city shall surely be given into the hand of the army of the king of Babylon, and he shall take it.
Then the rulers said to the king, Let this man, we pray thee, be put to death, inasmuch as he weakens the hands of the men of war who remain in this city, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words to them. For this man seeks not the welfare of this people, but the hurt.
And Zedekiah the king said, Behold, he is in your hand, for the king is not he who can do anything against you.
Then they took Jeremiah, and cast him into the dungeon of Malchijah the king's son, that was in the court of the guard. And they let Jeremiah down with cords. And in the dungeon there was no water, but mire, and Jeremiah sank in the mire.
Now when Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, a eunuch, who was in the king's house, heard that they had put Jeremiah in the dungeon (the king then sitting in the gate of Benjamin),
Ebed-melech went forth out of the king's house, and spoke to the king, saying,
My lord the king, these men have done evil in all that they have done to Jeremiah the prophet whom they have cast into the dungeon. And he is likely to die in the place where he is because of the famine, for there is no more bread in the city.
Then the king commanded Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, saying, Take from here thirty men with thee, and take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon before he dies.
So Ebed-melech took the men with him, and went into the house of the king under the treasury, and took from there rags and worn-out garments, and let them down by cords into the dungeon to Jeremiah.
And Ebed-melech the Ethiopian said to Jeremiah, Now put these rags and worn-out garments under thine armpits under the cords. And Jeremiah did so.
So they drew up Jeremiah with the cords, and took him up out of the dungeon. And Jeremiah remained in the court of the guard.
Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took Jeremiah the prophet to him into the third entry that is in the house of Jehovah. And the king said to Jeremiah, I will ask thee a thing; hide nothing from me.
Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, If I declare it to thee, will thou not surely put me to death? And if I give thee counsel, thou will not hearken to me.
So Zedekiah the king swore secretly to Jeremiah, saying, As Jehovah lives, who made us this soul, I will not put thee to death, nor will I give thee into the hand of these men who seek thy life.
Then Jeremiah said to Zedekiah, Thus says Jehovah, the God of hosts, the God of Israel. If thou will go forth to the king of Babylon's rulers, then thy soul shall live, and this city shall not be burned with fire, and thou shall live, and thy house.
But if thou will not go forth to the king of Babylon's rulers, then this city shall be given into the hand of the Chaldeans, and they shall burn it with fire, and thou shall not escape out of their hand.
And Zedekiah the king said to Jeremiah, I am afraid of the Jews who have fallen away to the Chaldeans, lest they deliver me into their hand, and they abuse me.
But Jeremiah said, They shall not deliver thee. Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of Jehovah, in that which I speak to thee, so it shall be well with thee, and thy soul shall live.
Behold, all the women who are left in the king of Judah's house shall be brought forth to the king of Babylon's rulers. And those women shall say, Thy familiar friends have set upon thee, and have prevailed over thee. Since thy feet are sunk in the mire, they have turned back away.
And they shall bring out all thy wives and thy sons to the Chaldeans. And thou shall not escape out of their hand, but shall be taken by the hand of the king of Babylon. And thou shall cause this city to be burned with fire.
Then Zedekiah said to Jeremiah, Let no man know of these words, and thou shall not die.
But if the rulers hear that I have talked with thee, and they come to thee, and say to thee, Declare to us now what thou have said to the king, hide it not from us, and we will not put thee to death, also what the king said to thee,
then thou shall say to them, I presented my supplication before the king, that he would not cause me to return to Jonathan's house to die there.
Then all the rulers came to Jeremiah, and asked him. And he told them according to all these words that the king had commanded. So they left off speaking with him, for the matter was not perceived.
So Jeremiah abode in the court of the guard until the day that Jerusalem was taken.

And it came to pass when Jerusalem was taken, in the ninth year of Zedekiah king of Judah, in the tenth month, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon and all his army came against Jerusalem, and besieged it.
In the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the fourth month, the ninth day of the month, a breach was made in the city.
And all the princes of the king of Babylon came in, and sat in the middle gate, to wit, Nergal-sharezer, Samgar-nebo, Sarsechim, Rab-saris, Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, with all the rest of the princes of the king of Babylon.
And it came to pass that, when Zedekiah the king of Judah and all the men of war saw them, then they fled, and went forth out of the city by night, by the way of the king's garden, through the gate between the two walls, and he went out toward the Arabah.
But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after them, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho. And when they had taken him, they brought him up to Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath, and he gave judgment upon him.
Then the king of Babylon killed the sons of Zedekiah in Riblah before his eyes. Also the king of Babylon killed all the nobles of Judah.
Moreover he put out Zedekiah's eyes, and bound him in fetters to carry him to Babylon.
And the Chaldeans burned the king's house, and the houses of the people, with fire, and broke down the walls of Jerusalem.
Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive into Babylon the residue of the people that remained in the city, the deserters also that fell away to him, and the residue of the people that remained.
But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poor of the people, that had nothing, in the land of Judah, and gave them vineyards and fields at the same time.
Now Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon gave charge concerning Jeremiah to Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, saying,
Take him, and look well to him, and do him no harm, but do to him even as he shall say to thee.
So Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard sent, and Nebushazban, Rab-saris, and Nergal-sharezer, Rab-mag, and all the chief officers of the king of Babylon.
And they sent, and took Jeremiah out of the court of the guard, and committed him to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, that he should carry him home. So he dwelt among the people.
Now the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah while he was shut up in the court of the guard, saying,
Behold, I will bring my words upon this city for evil, and not for good, and they shall be accomplished before thee in that day.
But I will deliver thee in that day, says Jehovah, and thou shall not be given into the hand of the men of whom thou are afraid.
For I will surely save thee, and thou shall not fall by the sword, but thy life shall be for a prey to thee, because thou have put thy trust in me, says Jehovah.

The word which came to Jeremiah from Jehovah, after Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had let him go from Ramah, when he had taken him being bound in chains among all the captives of Jerusalem and Judah who were carried away captive to Babylon.
And the captain of the guard took Jeremiah, and said to him, Jehovah thy God pronounced this evil upon this place,
and Jehovah has brought it, and done according as he spoke. Because ye have sinned against Jehovah, and have not obeyed his voice, therefore this thing has come upon you.
And now, behold, I loose thee this day from the chains which are upon thy hand. If it seem good to thee to come with me into Babylon, come, and I will look well to thee, but if it seems ill to thee to come with me into Babylon, forbear. Behold, all the land is before thee, where it seems good and right to thee to go, there go.
Now while he was not yet gone back, he said, Go back then to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, whom the king of Babylon has made governor over the cities of Judah, and dwell with him among the people, or go wherever it seems right to thee to go. So the captain of the guard gave him food and a present, and let him go.
Then Jeremiah went to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah, and dwelt with him among the people who were left in the land.
Now when all the captains of the forces who were in the fields, even they and their men, heard that the king of Babylon had made Gedaliah the son of Ahikam governor in the land, and had committed to him men, and women, and sons, and of the poorest of the land, of those who were not carried away captive to Babylon,
then they came to Gedaliah to Mizpah, namely, Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and Johanan and Jonathan the sons of Kareah, and Seraiah the son of Tanhumeth, and the sons of Ephai the Netophathite, and Jezaniah the son of the Maacathite, they and their men.
And Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan swore to them and to their men, saying, Fear not to serve the Chaldeans. Dwell in the land, and serve the king of Babylon, and it shall be well with you.
As for me, behold, I will dwell at Mizpah, to stand before the Chaldeans who shall come to us. But ye, gather ye wine and summer fruits and oil, and put them in your vessels, and dwell in your cities that ye have taken.
Likewise when all the Jews that were in Moab, and among the sons of Ammon, and in Edom, and who were in all the countries, heard that the king of Babylon had left a remnant of Judah, and that he had set over them Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan,
then all the Jews returned out of all places where they were driven, and came to the land of Judah, to Gedaliah, to Mizpah, and gathered very much wine and summer fruits.
Moreover Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were in the fields, came to Gedaliah to Mizpah,
and said to him, Do thou know that Baalis the king of the sons of Ammon has sent Ishmael the son of Nethaniah to take thy life? But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam did not believe them.
Then Johanan the son of Kareah spoke to Gedaliah in Mizpah secretly, saying, Let me go, I pray thee, and I will kill Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and no man shall know it. Why should he take thy life, that all the Jews who are gathered to thee should be scattered, and the remnant of Judah perish?
But Gedaliah the son of Ahikam said to Johanan the son of Kareah, Thou shall not do this thing, for thou speak falsely of Ishmael.

Now it came to pass in the seventh month, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, the son of Elishama, of the seed royal and one of the chief officers of the king, and ten men with him, came to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah, and there they ate bread together in Mizpah.
Then Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men who were with him, arose and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword, and killed him, whom the king of Babylon had made governor over the land.
Ishmael also killed all the Jews who were with him, namely, with Gedaliah, at Mizpah, and the Chaldeans who were found there, the men of war.
And it came to pass the second day after he had slain Gedaliah, and no man knew it,
that men came from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria, even eighty men, having their beards shaven and their clothes torn, and having cut themselves, with meal offerings and frankincense in their hand, to bring them to the house of Jehovah.
And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth from Mizpah to meet them, weeping all along as he went. And it came to pass, as he met them, he said to them, Come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.
And it was so, when they came into the midst of the city, that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah killed them, and cast them into the midst of the pit, he, and the men who were with him.
But ten men were found among those who said to Ishmael, Kill us not, for we have stores hidden in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil, and of honey. So he held back, and did not kill them among their brothers.
Now the pit in which Ishmael cast all the dead bodies of the men whom he had slain by the side of Gedaliah (the same was that which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel), Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with those who were slain.
Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people who were in Mizpah, even the king's daughters, and all the people who remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam. Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive, and departed to go over to the sons of Ammon.
But when Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were with him, heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done,
then they took all the men, and went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon.
Now it came to pass that, when all the people who were with Ishmael saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were with him, then they were glad.
So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah turned about and came back, and went to Johanan the son of Kareah.
But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight men, and went to the sons of Ammon.
Then Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were with him, took all the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, from Mizpah, after he had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, namely, the men of war, and the women, and the sons, and the eunuchs, whom he had brought back from Gibeon.
And they departed, and dwelt in Geruth Chimham, which is by Bethlehem, to go to enter into Egypt
because of the Chaldeans, for they were afraid of them because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor over the land.

Then all the captains of the forces, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah, and all the people from the least even to the greatest, came near,
and said to Jeremiah the prophet, Let, we pray thee, our supplication be presented before thee, and pray for us to Jehovah thy God, even for all this remnant, for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us,
that Jehovah thy God may show us the way in which we should walk, and the thing that we should do.
Then Jeremiah the prophet said to them, I have heard you. Behold, I will pray to Jehovah your God according to your words, and it shall come to pass that whatever thing Jehovah shall answer you, I will declare it to you. I will keep nothing back from you.
Then they said to Jeremiah, Jehovah be a true and faithful witness amongst us, if we do not according to all the word with which Jehovah thy God shall send thee to us.
Whether it be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice of Jehovah our God, to whom we send thee, that it may be well with us when we obey the voice of Jehovah our God.
And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah.
Then he called Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces who were with him, and all the people from the least even to the greatest,
If ye will still abide in this land, then I will build you, and not pull you down, and I will plant you, and not pluck you up, for I relent of the evil that I have done to you.
Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid. Be not afraid of him, says Jehovah, for I am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand.
And I will grant you mercy, that he may have mercy upon you, and cause you to return to your own land.
But if ye say, We will not dwell in this land, so that ye do not obey the voice of Jehovah your God,
saying, No, but we will go into the land of Egypt, where we shall see no war, nor hear the sound of the trumpet, nor have hunger of bread, and we will dwell there-
If ye indeed set your faces to enter into Egypt, and go to sojourn there,
then it shall come to pass, that the sword, which ye fear, shall overtake you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, of which ye are afraid, shall follow hard after you there in Egypt, and there ye shall die.
So shall it be with all the men who set their faces to go into Egypt to sojourn there. They shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, and none of them shall remain or escape from the evil that I will bring upon them.
As my anger and my wrath has been poured forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, so shall my wrath be poured forth upon you when ye shall enter into Egypt. And ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach. And ye shall see this place no more.
Jehovah has spoken concerning you, O remnant of Judah, Go ye not into Egypt. Know certainly that I have testified to you this day.
For ye have dealt deceitfully against your own souls. For ye sent me to Jehovah your God, saying, Pray for us to Jehovah our God, and according to all that Jehovah our God shall say, so declare to us, and we will do it.
And I have this day declared it to you. But ye have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah your God in anything for which he has sent me to you.
Now therefore know certainly that ye shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence, in the place where ye desire to go to sojourn there.

And it came to pass that, when Jeremiah had made an end of speaking to all the people all the words of Jehovah their God, with which Jehovah their God had sent him to them, even all these words,
then Azariah the son of Hoshaiah, and Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the proud men, spoke, saying to Jeremiah, Thou speak falsely. Jehovah our God has not sent thee to say, Ye shall not go into Egypt to sojourn there.
But Baruch the son of Neriah set upon thee against us, to deliver us into the hand of the Chaldeans, that they may put us to death, and carry us away captive to Babylon.
So Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, and all the people, did not obey the voice of Jehovah, to dwell in the land of Judah.
But Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces, took all the remnant of Judah, who were returned from all the nations where they had been driven to sojourn in the land of Judah,
the men, and the women, and the sons, and the king's daughters, and every person that Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard had left with Gedaliah the son of Ahikam, the son of Shaphan, and Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah,
and they came into the land of Egypt, for they did not obey the voice of Jehovah. And they came to Tahpanhes.
Then the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah in Tahpanhes, saying,
Take great stones in thy hand, and hide them in mortar in the brickwork, which is at the entry of Pharaoh's house in Tahpanhes, in the sight of the men of Judah,
Behold, I will send and take Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon, my servant, and will set his throne upon these stones that I have hid, and he shall spread his royal pavilion over them.
And he shall come, and shall smite the land of Egypt, such as are for death, to death, and such as are for captivity, to captivity, and such as are for the sword, to the sword.
And I will kindle a fire in the houses of the gods of Egypt, and he shall burn them, and carry them away captive. And he shall array himself with the land of Egypt as a shepherd puts on his garment, and he shall go forth from there in peace.
He shall also break the pillars of Beth-shemesh that is in the land of Egypt. And the houses of the gods of Egypt he shall burn with fire.

The word that came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews who dwelt in the land of Egypt, who dwelt at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Memphis, and in the country of Pathros, saying,
Ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon all the cities of Judah. And, behold, this day they are a desolation. And no man dwells therein
because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me to anger, in that they went to burn incense, and to serve other gods, that they knew not, neither they, nor ye, nor your fathers.
However I sent all my servants the prophets to you, rising up early and sending them, saying, Oh, do not do this abominable thing that I hate.
But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense to other gods.
Therefore my wrath and my anger was poured forth, and was kindled in the cities of Judah and in the streets of Jerusalem, and they are wasted and desolate, as it is this day.
Why do ye commit this great evil against your own souls, to cut off from you man and woman, infant and suckling, out of the midst of Judah, to leave you none remaining,
in that ye provoke me to anger with the works of your hands, burning incense to other gods in the land of Egypt, where ye have gone to sojourn, that ye may be cut off, and that ye may be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the earth?
Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers, and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their wives, and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives which they committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?
They are not humbled even to this day. Neither have they feared, nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you and before your fathers.
Behold, I will set my face against you for evil, even to cut off all Judah.
And I will take the remnant of Judah, who have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, and they shall all be consumed. In the land of Egypt they shall fall. They shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine. They shall die, from the least even to the greatest, by the sword and by the famine, and they shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a reproach.
For I will punish those who dwell in the land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence,
so that none of the remnant of Judah who have gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or be left to return into the land of Judah, to which they have a desire to return to dwell there. For none shall return except such as shall escape.
Then all the men who knew that their wives burned incense to other gods, and all the women who stood by, a great assembly, even all the people who dwelt in the land of Egypt, in Pathros, answered Jeremiah, saying,
As for the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of Jehovah, we will not hearken to thee.
But we will certainly perform every word that has gone forth out of our mouth, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings to her, as we have done, we and our fathers, our kings and our rulers, in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem. For then we had plenty of food, and were well, and saw no evil.
But since we left off burning incense to the queen of heaven, and pouring out drink offerings to her, we have lacked all things, and have been consumed by the sword and by the famine.
And when we burned incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink offerings to her, did we make her cakes to worship her, and pour out drink offerings to her, without our husbands?
Then Jeremiah said to all the people, to the men, and to the women, even to all the people who had given him that answer, saying,
The incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, ye and your fathers, your kings and your rulers, and the people of the land, did Jehovah not remember them, and did it not come into his mind?
So that Jehovah could no longer bear, because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations which ye have committed. Therefore your land has become a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse, without inhabitant, as it is this day.
Because ye have burned incense, and because ye have sinned against Jehovah, and have not obeyed the voice of Jehovah, nor walked in his law, nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies, therefore this evil has happened to you, as it is this day.
Thus says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, saying, Ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and with your hands have fulfilled it, saying, We will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn incense to the queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings to her. Establish then your vows, and perform your vows.
Behold, I have sworn by my great name, says Jehovah, that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in all the land of Egypt, saying, As the lord Jehovah lives.
Behold, I watch over them for evil, and not for good. And all the men of Judah who are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed by the sword and by the famine, until there is an end of them.
And those who escape the sword shall return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah, few in number. And all the remnant of Judah, who have gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall know whose word shall stand, mine, or theirs.
Behold, I will give Pharaoh Hophra king of Egypt into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of those who seek his life, as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, who was his enemy, and sought his life.

The word that Jeremiah the prophet spoke to Baruch the son of Neriah, when he wrote these word in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah, king of Judah, saying,
Thou said, Woe is me now! For Jehovah has added sorrow to my pain. I am weary with my groaning, and I find no rest.
Behold, that which I have built I will break down, and that which I have planted I will pluck up, and this in the whole land.
And do thou seek great things for thyself? Seek them not, for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh, says Jehovah, but thy life I will give to thee for a prey in all places where thou go.

The word of Jehovah which came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the nations.
Prepare ye the buckler and shield, and draw near to battle.
Harness the horses, and get up, ye horsemen, and stand forth with your helmets. Furbish the spears. Put on the coats of mail.
Why have I seen it? They are dismayed and have turned backward. And their mighty ones are beaten down, and have fled apace, and do not look back. Terror is on every side, says Jehovah.
Let not the swift flee away, nor the mighty man escape. In the north by the river Euphrates they have stumbled and fallen.
Who is this that rises up like the Nile, whose waters toss themselves like the rivers?
Egypt rises up like the Nile, and his waters toss themselves like the rivers. And he says, I will rise up. I will cover the earth. I will destroy cities and the inhabitants thereof.
Cush and Put, who handle the shield, and the Ludim, who handle and bend the bow.
For that day is a day of the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, a day of vengeance, that he may avenge him of his adversaries. And the sword shall devour and be satiate, and shall drink its fill of their blood, for the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, has a sacrifice in the north country by the river Euphrates.
Go up into Gilead, and take balm, O virgin daughter of Egypt. In vain do thou use many medicines; there is no healing for thee.
The nations have heard of thy shame, and the earth is full of thy cry. For the mighty man has stumbled against the mighty; they are fallen, both of them together.
The word that Jehovah spoke to Jeremiah the prophet, how that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon should come and smite the land of Egypt.
Declare ye in Egypt, and publish in Migdol, and publish in Memphis and in Tahpanhes. Say ye, Stand forth, and prepare thee, for the sword has devoured round about thee.
Why are thy strong ones swept away? They stood not, because Jehovah drove them.
He made many to stumble, yea, they fell one upon another. And they said, Arise, and let us go again to our own people, and to the land of our nativity, from the oppressing sword.
They cried there, Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise. He has let the appointed time pass by.
As I live, says the King, whose name is Jehovah of hosts, surely like Tabor among the mountains, and like Carmel by the sea, so shall he come.
O thou daughter who dwells in Egypt, prepare thyself to go into captivity. For Memphis shall become a desolation, and shall be burnt up, without inhabitant.
Egypt is a very fair heifer, but destruction out of the north has come, it has come.
Also her hired men in the midst of her are like calves of the stall, for they also are turned back. They have fled away together. They did not stand, for the day of their calamity has come upon them, the time of their visitation.
The sound thereof shall go like the serpent, for they shall march with an army, and come against her with axes, as hewers of wood.
They shall cut down her forest, says Jehovah, though it cannot be searched because they are more than the locusts, and are innumerable.
The daughter of Egypt shall be put to shame. She shall be delivered into the hand of the people of the north.
Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, says, Behold, I will punish Amon of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt, with their gods, and their kings, even Pharaoh, and those who trust in him.
And I will deliver them into the hand of those who seek their lives, and into the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants. And afterwards it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old, says Jehovah.
But fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, nor be dismayed, O Israel. For, lo, I will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity. And Jacob shall return, and shall be quiet and at ease, and none shall make him afraid.
Fear thou not, O Jacob my servant, says Jehovah, for I am with thee. For I will make a full end of all the nations where I have driven thee, but I will not make a full end of thee. But I will correct thee in measure, and will in no way leave thee unpunished.

The word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning the Philistines, before Pharaoh smote Gaza.
Behold, waters rise up out of the north, and shall become an overflowing stream, and shall overflow the land and all that is therein, the city and those who dwell therein. And the men shall cry, and all the inhabitants of the land shall wail
at the noise of the stamping of the hoofs of his strong ones, at the rushing of his chariots, at the rumbling of his wheels. The fathers do not look back to their sons for feebleness of hands,
because of the day that comes to destroy all the Philistines, to cut off from Tyre and Sidon every helper who remains. For Jehovah will destroy the Philistines, the remnant of the isle of Caphtor.
Baldness has come upon Gaza. Ashkelon is brought to naught, the remnant of their valley. How long will thou cut thyself?
O thou sword of Jehovah, how long will it be ere thou be quiet? Put up thyself into thy scabbard. Rest, and be still.
How can thou be quiet, since Jehovah has given thee a charge against Ashkelon, and against the sea-shore. He has appointed it there.

Woe to Nebo! For it is laid waste. Kiriathaim is put to shame; it is taken. Misgab is put to shame and broken down.
Come, and let us cut her off from being a nation. Thou also, O madmen, shall be brought to silence. The sword shall pursue thee.
Desolation and great destruction!
Moab is destroyed. Her little ones have caused a cry to be heard.
For they shall go up by the ascent of Luhith with continual weeping, for at the descent of Horonaim they have heard the distress of the cry of destruction.
Flee, save your lives, and be like the heath in the wilderness.
For, because thou have trusted in thy works and in thy treasures, thou also shall be taken. And Chemosh shall go forth into captivity, his priests and his rulers together.
And the destroyer shall come upon every city, and no city shall escape. The valley also shall perish, and the plain shall be destroyed, as Jehovah has spoken.
Give wings to Moab, that she may fly and get her away. And her cities shall become a desolation, without any to dwell therein.
Cursed be he who does the work of Jehovah negligently, and cursed be he who keeps back his sword from blood.
Moab has been at ease from his youth, and he has settled on his lees, and has not been emptied from vessel to vessel, nor has he gone into captivity. Therefore his taste remains in him, and his scent is not changed.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will send to him those who pour off, and they shall pour him off. And they shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles in pieces.
And Moab shall be ashamed of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel their confidence.
How can ye say, We are mighty men, and valiant men for the war?
Moab is laid waste, and they have gone up into his cities. And his chosen young men have gone down to the slaughter, says the King, whose name is Jehovah of hosts.
The calamity of Moab is near to come, and his affliction hastens fast.
All ye who are round about him, bemoan him, and all ye who know his name, say, How the strong staff has broken, the beautiful rod!
O thou daughter who dwells in Dibon, come down from thy glory, and sit in thirst, for the destroyer of Moab has come up against thee. He has destroyed thy strongholds.
O inhabitant of Aroer, stand by the way, and watch. Ask him who flees, and her who escapes. Say, What has been done?
Moab is put to shame, for it is broken down. Wail and cry, tell ye it by the Arnon, that Moab is laid waste.
upon Holon, and upon Jahzah, and upon Mephaath,
and upon Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Beth-diblathaim,
and upon Kiriathaim, and upon Beth-gamul, and upon Beth-meon,
and upon Kerioth, and upon Bozrah, and upon all the cities of the land of Moab, far or near.
The horn of Moab is cut off, and his arm is broken, says Jehovah.
Make ye him drunken, for he magnified himself against Jehovah. And Moab shall wallow in his vomit, and he also shall be in derision.
For was not Israel a derision to thee? Was he found among thieves? For as often as thou speak of him, thou wag the head.
O ye inhabitants of Moab, leave the cities, and dwell in the rock, and be like the dove that makes her nest over the mouth of an abyss.
We have heard of the pride of Moab, that he is very proud, his loftiness, and his pride, and his arrogance, and the haughtiness of his heart.
I know his wrath, says Jehovah, that it is nothing. His boastings have wrought nothing.
Therefore I will wail for Moab, yea, I will cry out for all Moab. For they shall mourn the men of Kir-heres.
With more than the weeping of Jazer I will weep for thee, O vine of Sibmah. Thy branches passed over the sea. They reached even to the sea of Jazer. The destroyer has fallen upon thy summer fruits and upon thy vintage.
And gladness and joy is taken away from the fruitful field and from the land of Moab. And I have caused wine to cease from the winepresses. None shall tread with shouting. The shouting shall be no shouting.
From the cry of Heshbon even to Elealeh, even to Jahaz they have uttered their voice, from Zoar even to Horonaim, to Eglath-shelishiyah. For the waters of Nimrim also shall become desolate.
Moreover I will cause to cease in Moab, says Jehovah, him who offers in the high place, and him who burns incense to his gods.
Therefore my heart sounds for Moab like pipes, and my heart sounds like pipes for the men of Kir-heres. Therefore the abundance that he has gotten is perished.
For every head is bald, and every beard clipped. Upon all the hands are cuttings, and upon the loins sackcloth.
On all the housetops of Moab and in the streets thereof there is lamentation everywhere. For I have broken Moab like a vessel of which none delights, says Jehovah.
How it is broken down! How they do wail! How Moab has turned the back with shame! So Moab shall become a derision and a horror to all who are round about him.
Behold, he shall fly as an eagle, and shall spread out his wings against Moab.
Kerioth is taken, and the strongholds are seized, and the heart of the mighty men of Moab at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
And Moab shall be destroyed from being a people, because he has magnified himself against Jehovah.
Fear and the pit and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab, says Jehovah.
He who flees from the fear shall fall into the pit, and he who gets up out of the pit shall be taken in the snare. For I will bring upon him, even upon Moab, the year of their visitation, says Jehovah.
Those who fled stand without strength under the shadow of Heshbon. For a fire has gone forth out of Heshbon, and a flame from the midst of Sihon, and has devoured the corner of Moab, and the crown of the head of the tumultuous ones.
Woe to thee, O Moab! The people of Chemosh is undone, for thy sons are taken away captive, and thy daughters into captivity.
Yet I will bring back the captivity of Moab in the latter days, says Jehovah. Thus far is the judgment of Moab.

Has Israel no sons? Has he no heir? Why then does Malcam possess Gad, and his people dwell in the cities thereof?
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will cause an alarm of war to be heard against Rabbah of the sons of Ammon, and it shall become a desolate heap, and her daughters shall be burned with fire. Then Israel shall possess those who possessed him, says Jehovah.
Wail, O Heshbon, for Ai is laid waste. Cry, ye daughters of Rabbah. Gird you with sackcloth. Lament, and run to and fro among the fences. For Malcam shall go into captivity, his priests and his rulers together.
Why do thou glory in the valleys, thy flowing valley? O backsliding daughter, who trusted in her treasures, saying, Who shall come to me?
Behold, I will bring a fear upon thee, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, from all who are round about thee. And ye shall be driven out every man straight forth, and there shall be none to gather together the fugitives.
But afterward I will bring back the captivity of the sons of Ammon, says Jehovah.
Is wisdom no more in Teman? Has counsel perished from the prudent? Has their wisdom vanished?
Flee ye, turn back, dwell in the depths, O inhabitants of Dedan. For I will bring the calamity of Esau upon him, the time that I shall visit him.
If grape-gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some gleaning grapes? If thieves by night, would they not destroy till they had enough?
But I have made Esau bare. I have uncovered his secret places, and he shall not be able to hide himself. His seed is destroyed, and his brothers, and his neighbors, and he is not.
Leave thy fatherless sons; I will preserve them alive. And let thy widows trust in me.
Behold, those to whom it did not pertain to drink of the cup shall assuredly drink. And are thou he who shall go altogether unpunished? Thou shall not go unpunished, but thou shall surely drink.
For I have sworn by myself, says Jehovah, that Bozrah shall become an astonishment, a reproach, a waste, and a curse, and all the cities thereof shall be perpetual wastes.
I have heard news from Jehovah. And an ambassador is sent among the nations, saying, Gather yourselves together, and come against her, and rise up to the battle.
For, behold, I have made thee small among the nations, and despised among men.
As for thy formidableness, the pride of thy heart has deceived thee, O thou who dwells in the clefts of the rock, who holds the height of the hill. Though thou should make thy nest as high as the eagle, I will bring thee down from there, says Jehovah.
And Edom shall become an astonishment. Everyone who passes by it shall be astonished, and shall hiss at all the plagues of it.
As in the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbor cities thereof, says Jehovah, no man shall dwell there, nor shall any son of man sojourn in it.
Behold, he shall come up like a lion from the pride of the Jordan against the strong habitation. For I will suddenly make them run away from it. And he who is chosen, him I will appoint over it. For who is like me, and who will appoint a time for me, and who is the shepherd who will stand before me?
Surely they shall drag them away, even the little ones of the flock. Surely he shall make their habitation desolate over them.
The earth trembles at the noise of their fall. There is a cry; the noise of it is heard in the Red Sea.
Behold, he shall come up and fly as the eagle, and spread out his wings against Bozrah. And the heart of the mighty men of Edom at that day shall be as the heart of a woman in her pangs.
Of Damascus. Hamath is confounded, and Arpad, for they have heard evil news. They are melted away. There is sorrow on the sea; it cannot be quiet.
Damascus has grown feeble. She turns herself to flee, and trembling has seized on her. Anguish and sorrows have taken hold of her, as of a woman in travail.
How is the city of praise not forsaken, the city of my joy?
Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets, and all the men of war shall be brought to silence in that day, says Jehovah of hosts.
And I will kindle a fire in the wall of Damascus, and it shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.
Arise ye. Go up to Kedar, and destroy the sons of the east.
They shall take their tents and their flocks. They shall carry away for themselves their curtains, and all their vessels, and their camels. And they shall cry to them, Terror on every side!
Flee ye. Wander far off. Dwell in the depths, O ye inhabitants of Hazor, says Jehovah. For Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon has taken counsel against you, and has conceived a purpose against you.
Arise, get you up to a nation that is at ease, that dwells without worry, says Jehovah, that has neither gates nor bars, that dwells alone.
And their camels shall be a booty, and the multitude of their cattle a spoil. And I will scatter to all winds those who have the corners of their hair cut off. And I will bring their calamity from every side of them, says Jehovah.
And Hazor shall be a dwelling-place of jackals, a desolation forever. No man shall dwell there, nor shall any son of man sojourn therein.
The word of Jehovah that came to Jeremiah the prophet concerning Elam, in the beginning of the reign of Zedekiah king of Judah, saying,
Behold, I will break the bow of Elam, the chief of their might.
And upon Elam I will bring the four winds from the four quarters of heaven, and will scatter them toward all those winds. And there shall be no nation where the outcasts of Elam shall not come.
And I will cause Elam to be dismayed before their enemies, and before those who seek their life. And I will bring evil upon them, even my fierce anger, says Jehovah. And I will send the sword after them, till I have consumed them.
And I will set my throne in Elam, and will destroy from there king and rulers, says Jehovah.
But it shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring back the captivity of Elam, says Jehovah.

The word that Jehovah spoke concerning Babylon, concerning the land of the Chaldeans, by Jeremiah the prophet.
Declare ye among the nations and publish, and set up a standard, publish, and conceal not. Say, Babylon is taken. Bel is put to shame. Merodach is dismayed. Her images are put to shame; her idols are dismayed.
For out of the north there comes up a nation against her, which shall make her land desolate, and none shall dwell therein. They are fled. They are gone, both man and beast.
In those days, and in that time, says Jehovah, the sons of Israel shall come, they and the sons of Judah together. They shall go on their way weeping, and shall seek Jehovah their God.
They shall inquire concerning Zion with their faces toward it, saying, Come ye, and join yourselves to Jehovah in an everlasting covenant that shall not be forgotten.
My people have been lost sheep. Their shepherds have caused them to go astray. They have turned them away on the mountains. They have gone from mountain to hill. They have forgotten their resting-place.
All who found them have devoured them, and their adversaries said, We are not guilty, because they have sinned against Jehovah, the habitation of righteousness, even Jehovah, the hope of their fathers.
Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and go forth out of the land of the Chaldeans, and be as the he-goats before the flocks.
For, lo, I will stir up and cause to come up against Babylon a company of great nations from the north country, and they shall set themselves in array against her. From there she shall be taken. Their arrows shall be as of an expert mighty man; none shall return in vain.
And Chaldea shall be a prey. All who prey upon her shall be satisfied, says Jehovah.
Because ye are glad, because ye rejoice, O ye who plunder my heritage, because ye are wanton as a heifer that treads out the grain, and neigh as strong horses,
your mother shall be utterly put to shame. She who bore you shall be confounded. Behold, she shall be the hindermost of the nations, a wilderness, a dry land, and a desert.
Because of the wrath of Jehovah she shall not be inhabited, but she shall be wholly desolate. Everyone who goes by Babylon shall be astonished, and hiss at all her plagues.
Set yourselves in array against Babylon round about, all ye who bend the bow. Shoot at her; spare no arrows. For she has sinned against Jehovah.
Shout against her round about. She has submitted herself. Her bulwarks are fallen. Her walls are thrown down. For it is the vengeance of Jehovah. Take vengeance upon her. As she has done, do to her.
Cut off the sower from Babylon, and him who handles the sickle in the time of harvest. For fear of the oppressing sword they shall turn each one to his people, and they shall flee each one to his own land.
Israel is a hunted sheep, the lions have driven him away. First, the king of Assyria devoured him, and now at last Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon has broken his bones.
Behold, I will punish the king of Babylon and his land, as I have punished the king of Assyria.
And I will bring Israel again to his pasture, and he shall feed on Carmel and Bashan, and his soul shall be satisfied upon the hills of Ephraim and in Gilead.
In those days, and in that time, says Jehovah, the iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found. For I will pardon those whom I leave as a remnant.
Go up against the land of Merathaim, even against it, and against the inhabitants of Pekod. Kill and utterly destroy after them, says Jehovah, and do according to all that I have commanded thee.
A sound of battle is in the land, and of great destruction.
How the hammer of the whole earth is cut apart and broken! How Babylon has become a desolation among the nations!
I have laid a snare for thee, and thou are also taken, O Babylon, and thou were not aware. Thou are found, and also caught, because thou have striven against Jehovah.
Jehovah has opened his armory, and has brought forth the weapons of his indignation, for the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, has a work in the land of the Chaldeans.
Come against her from the utmost border. Open her store-houses. Cast her up as heaps, and destroy her utterly; let nothing of her be left.
Kill all her bullocks. Let them go down to the slaughter. Woe to them! For their day has come, the time of their visitation.
The voice of those who flee and escape out of the land of Babylon, to declare in Zion the vengeance of Jehovah our God, the vengeance of his temple.
Call together the archers against Babylon, all those who bend the bow. Encamp against her round about; let none thereof escape. Recompense her according to her work. According to all that she has done, do to her. For she has been proud against Jehovah, against the Holy One of Israel.
Therefore her young men shall fall in her streets, and all her men of war shall be brought to silence in that day, says Jehovah.
Behold, I am against thee, O thou proud one, says the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, for thy day has come, the time that I will visit thee.
And the proud one shall stumble and fall, and none shall raise him up. And I will kindle a fire in his cities, and it shall devour all who are round about him.
The sons of Israel and the sons of Judah are oppressed together, and all who took them captive hold them firm; they refuse to let them go.
Their Redeemer is strong. Jehovah of hosts is his name. He will thoroughly plead their cause, that he may give rest to the earth, and disquiet the inhabitants of Babylon.
A sword is upon the Chaldeans, says Jehovah, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her rulers, and upon her wise men.
A sword is upon the boasters, and they shall become fools. A sword is upon her mighty men, and they shall be dismayed.
A sword is upon their horses, and upon their chariots, and upon all the mixed people who are in the midst of her, and they shall become as women. A sword is upon her treasures, and they shall be robbed.
A drought is upon her waters, and they shall be dried up. For it is a land of graven images, and they are mad over idols.
Therefore the wild beasts of the desert with the wolves shall dwell there, and the ostriches shall dwell therein. And it shall no more be inhabited forever, nor shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation.
As when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah and the neighbor cities thereof, says Jehovah, so shall no man dwell there, nor shall any son of man sojourn in it.
Behold, a people comes from the north, and a great nation and many kings shall be stirred up from the outermost parts of the earth.
They lay hold on bow and spear. They are cruel, and have no mercy. Their voice roars like the sea, and they ride upon horses, each one set in array, as a man to the battle, against thee, O daughter of Babylon.
The king of Babylon has heard the news of them, and his hands grow feeble. Anguish has taken hold of him, and pangs as of a woman in travail.
Behold, the enemy shall come up like a lion from the pride of the Jordan against the strong habitation. For I will suddenly make them run away from it, and he who is chosen, him I will appoint over it. For who is like me, and who will appoint a time for me, and who is the shepherd who can stand before me?
Surely they shall drag them away, even the little ones of the flock. Surely he shall make their habitation desolate over them.
At the noise of the taking of Babylon the earth trembles, and the cry is heard among the nations.

Behold, I will raise up against Babylon, and against those who dwell in Leb-kamai, a destroying wind.
And I will send strangers to Babylon, who shall winnow her, and they shall empty her land. For in the day of trouble they shall be against her round about.
Against him who bends let the archer bend his bow, and against him who lifts himself up in his coat of mail. And spare ye not her young men. Destroy ye utterly all her host.
And they shall fall down slain in the land of the Chaldeans, and thrust through in her streets.
For Israel is not forsaken, nor Judah, of his God, of Jehovah of hosts, though their land is full of guilt against the Holy One of Israel.
Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and save every man his life. Be not cut off in her iniquity, for it is the time of Jehovah's vengeance; he will render to her a recompense.
Babylon has been a golden cup in Jehovah's hand, that made all the earth drunken. The nations have drunk of her wine, therefore the nations are mad.
Babylon is suddenly fallen and destroyed. Wail for her. Take balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed.
We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed. Forsake her, and let us go each one into his own country. For her judgment reaches to heaven, and is lifted up even to the skies.
Jehovah has brought forth our righteousness. Come, and let us declare in Zion the work of Jehovah our God.
Make sharp the arrows. Hold firm the shields. Jehovah has stirred up the spirit of the kings of the Medes, because his purpose is against Babylon, to destroy it. For it is the vengeance of Jehovah, the vengeance of his temple.
Set up a standard against the walls of Babylon. Make the watch strong. Set the watchmen. Prepare the ambushes. For Jehovah has both purposed and done that which he spoke concerning the inhabitants of Babylon.
O thou who dwell upon many waters, abundant in treasures, thine end has come, the measure of thy covetousness.
Jehovah of hosts has sworn by himself, saying, Surely I will fill thee with men as with the canker-worm, and they shall lift up a shout against thee.
He has made the earth by his power. He has established the world by his wisdom, and by his understanding he has stretched out the heavens.
When he utters his voice, there is a tumult of waters in the heavens, and he causes the vapors to ascend from the ends of the earth. He makes lightnings for the rain, and brings forth the wind out of his treasuries.
Every man has become brutish, without knowledge. Every goldsmith is put to shame by his image, for his molten image is falsehood, and there is no breath in them.
They are vanity, a work of delusion. In the time of their visitation they shall perish.
The portion of Jacob is not like these, for he is the former of all things, and Israel is the tribe of his inheritance. Jehovah of hosts is his name.
Thou are my battle-axe and weapons of war. And with thee I will break in pieces the nations, and with thee I will destroy kingdoms,
and with thee I will break in pieces the horse and his rider,
and with thee I will break in pieces the chariot and him who rides in it, and with thee I will break in pieces man and woman, and with thee I will break in pieces the old man and the youth, and with thee I will break in pieces the young man and the virgin,
and with thee I will break in pieces the shepherd and his flock, and with thee I will break in pieces the husbandman and his yoke of oxen, and with thee I will break in pieces governors and deputies.
And I will render to Babylon and to all the inhabitants of Chaldea all their evil that they have done in Zion in your sight, says Jehovah.
Behold, I am against thee, O destroying mountain, says Jehovah, which destroys all the earth. And I will stretch out my hand upon thee, and roll thee down from the rocks, and will make thee a burnt mountain.
And they shall not take from thee a stone for a corner, nor a stone for foundations, but thou shall be desolate forever, says Jehovah.
Set ye up a standard in the land. Blow the trumpet among the nations. Prepare the nations against her. Call together against her the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashkenaz. Appoint a marshal against her. Cause the horses to come up as the rough canker-worm.
Prepare against her the nations, the kings of the Medes, the governors of it, and all the deputies of it, and all the land of their dominion.
And the land trembles and is in pain, for the purposes of Jehovah against Babylon stand, to make the land of Babylon a desolation, without inhabitant.
The mighty men of Babylon have ceased fighting; they remain in their strongholds. Their might has failed. They have become as women. Her dwelling-places are set on fire. Her bars are broken.
One post shall run to meet another, and one messenger to met another, to show the king of Babylon that his city is taken on every quarter.
And the passages are seized, and the reeds they have burned with fire, and the men of war are frightened.
The daughter of Babylon is like a threshing-floor at the time when it is trodden. Yet a little while, and the time of harvest shall come for her.
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon has devoured me. He has crushed me. He has made me an empty vessel. He has, like a monster, swallowed me up. He has filled his stomach with my delicacies. He has cast me out.
The violence done to me and to my flesh be upon Babylon, the inhabitant of Zion shall say. And, My blood be upon the inhabitants of Chaldea, Jerusalem shall say.
Behold, I will plead thy cause, and take vengeance for thee. And I will dry up her sea, and make her fountain dry.
And Babylon shall become heaps, a dwelling-place for jackals, an astonishment, and a hissing, without inhabitant.
They shall roar together like young lions. They shall growl as lions' whelps.
When they are heated, I will make their feast. And I will make them drunken, that they may rejoice, and sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says Jehovah.
I will bring them down like lambs to the slaughter, like rams with he-goats.
How Sheshach is taken, and the praise of the whole earth seized! How Babylon has become a desolation among the nations!
The sea has come up upon Babylon. She is covered with the multitude of the waves thereof.
Her cities have become a desolation, a dry land, and a desert, a land in which no man dwells, nor does any son of man pass thereby.
And I will execute judgment upon Bel in Babylon, and I will bring forth out of his mouth that which he has swallowed up. And the nations shall not flow any more to him. Yea, the wall of Babylon shall fall.
My people, go ye out of the midst of her, and save yourselves each man from the fierce anger of Jehovah.
And let not your heart faint. Neither fear ye for the news that shall be heard in the land. For news shall come one year, and after that in another year, news, and violence in the land, ruler against ruler.
Therefore, behold, the days come, that I will execute judgment upon the graven images of Babylon. And her whole land shall be confounded, and all her slain shall fall in the midst of her.
Then the heavens and the earth, and all that is therein, shall sing for joy over Babylon. For the destroyers shall come to her from the north, says Jehovah.
As Babylon has caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon shall fall the slain of all the land.
Ye who have escaped the sword, go ye; do not stand still. Remember Jehovah from afar, and let Jerusalem come into your mind.
We are confounded, because we have heard reproach. Confusion has covered our faces. For strangers have come into the sanctuaries of Jehovah's house.
Therefore, behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that I will execute judgment upon her graven images, and through all her land the wounded shall groan.
Though Babylon should mount up to heaven, and though she should fortify the height of her strength, yet from me destroyers shall come to her, says Jehovah.
The sound of a cry from Babylon, and of great destruction from the land of the Chaldeans!
For Jehovah lays Babylon waste, and destroys the great voice out of her, and their waves roar like many waters; the noise of their voice is uttered.
For the destroyer has come upon her, even upon Babylon, and her mighty men are taken. Their bows are broken in pieces. For Jehovah is a God of recompenses; he will surely requite.
And I will make drunk her rulers and her wise men, her governors and her deputies, and her mighty men. And they shall sleep a perpetual sleep, and not wake, says the King, whose name is Jehovah of hosts.
The broad walls of Babylon shall be utterly overthrown, and her high gates shall be burned with fire. And the peoples shall labor for vanity, and the nations for the fire, and they shall be weary.
The word which Jeremiah the prophet commanded Seraiah the son of Neriah, the son of Mahseiah, when he went with Zedekiah the king of Judah to Babylon in the fourth year of his reign. Now Seraiah was chief chamberlain.
And Jeremiah wrote in a book all the evil that would come upon Babylon, even all these words that are written concerning Babylon.
And Jeremiah said to Seraiah, When thou come to Babylon, then see that thou read all these words.
And say, O Jehovah, thou have spoken concerning this place, to cut it off, that none shall dwell therein, neither man nor beast, but that it shall be desolate forever.
And it shall be, when thou have made an end of reading this book, that thou shall bind a stone to it, and cast it into the midst of the Euphrates.
And thou shall say, Thus Babylon shall sink, and shall not rise again because of the evil that I will bring upon her, and they shall be weary. Thus far are the words of Jeremiah.

Zedekiah was twenty-one years old when he began to reign, and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem. And his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah.
And he did that which was evil in the sight of Jehovah, according to all that Jehoiakim had done.
For it came to pass through the anger of Jehovah, in Jerusalem and Judah, until he had cast them out from his presence. And Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon.
And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he and all his army against Jerusalem, and encamped against it. And they built forts against it round about.
So the city was besieged to the eleventh year of king Zedekiah.
In the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month, the famine was severe in the city, so that there was no bread for the people of the land.
Then a breach was made in the city, and all the men of war fled, and went forth out of the city by night by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's garden, (now the Chaldeans were against the city round about), and they went toward the Arabah.
But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king, and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho, and all his army was scattered from him.
Then they took the king, and carried him up to the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of Hamath, and he gave judgment upon him.
And the king of Babylon killed the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes. He also killed all the rulers of Judah in Riblah.
And he put out the eyes of Zedekiah. And the king of Babylon bound him in fetters, and carried him to Babylon, and put him in prison till the day of his death.
Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month, which was the nineteenth year of king Nebuchadrezzar, king of Babylon, Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard, who stood before the king of Babylon, came into Jerusalem.
And he burned the house of Jehovah, and the king's house, and all the houses of Jerusalem. Even every great house, he burned with fire.
And all the army of the Chaldeans, who were with the captain of the guard, broke down all the walls of Jerusalem round about.
Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the poorest of the people, and the residue of the people who were left in the city, and those who fell away, who fell to the king of Babylon, and the residue of the multitude.
But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left of the poorest of the land to be vinedressers and husbandmen.
And the pillars of brass that were in the house of Jehovah, and the bases and the brazen sea that were in the house of Jehovah, the Chaldeans broke in pieces, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon.
The pots also, and the shovels, and the snuffers, and the basins, and the spoons, and all the vessels of brass with which they ministered, they took away.
And the cups, and the fire pans, and the basins, and the pots, and the lampstands, and the spoons, and the bowls-that which was of gold, in gold, and that which was of silver, in silver-the captain of the guard took away.
The two pillars, the one sea, and the twelve brazen bulls that were under the bases, which king Solomon had made for the house of Jehovah-the brass of all these vessels was without weight.
And as for the pillars, the height of the one pillar was eighteen cubits, and a line of twelve cubits encompassed it, and the thickness of it was four fingers; it was hollow.
And a capital of brass was upon it. And the height of the one capital was five cubits, with network and pomegranates upon the capital round about, all of brass. And the second pillar also had like these, and pomegranates.
And there were ninety-six pomegranates on the sides. All the pomegranates were a hundred upon the network round about.
And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest, and Zephaniah the second priest, and the three keepers of the threshold.
And from the city he took an officer who was set over the men of war, and seven men of those who saw the king's face, who were found in the city, and the scribe of the captain of the army who mustered the people of the land, and sixty men of the people of the land who were found in the midst of the city.
And Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard took them, and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah.
And the king of Babylon smote them, and put them to death at Riblah in the land of Hamath. So Judah was carried away captive out of his land.
In the seventh year three thousand twenty-three Jews.
In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar he carried away captive from Jerusalem eight hundred thirty-two persons.
In the twenty-third year of Nebuchadrezzar Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven hundred forty-five persons. All the persons were four thousand six hundred.
And it came to pass in the thirty-seventh year of the captivity of Jehoiachin king of Judah, in the twelfth month, in the twenty-fifth day of the month, that Evil-merodach king of Babylon, in the first year of his reign, lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth out of prison.
And he spoke kindly to him, and set his throne above the throne of the kings who were with him in Babylon,
and changed his prison garments. And he ate bread before him continually all the days of his life.
And for his allowance, there was a continual allowance given him by the king of Babylon, every day a portion until the day of his death, all the days of his life.

Lamentations

How the city sits solitary, that was full of people! She has become as a widow, who was great among the nations! She who was a princess among the provinces has become tributary!
She weeps bitterly in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks. Among all her loved ones she has none to comfort her. All her friends have dealt treacherously with her, they have become her enemies.
Judah has gone into captivity because of affliction. And because of great servitude she dwells among the nations. She finds no rest. All her persecutors overtook her in the distress.
The ways of Zion mourn, because none come to the solemn assembly. All her gates are desolate. Her priests sigh. Her virgins are afflicted, and she herself is in bitterness.
Her adversaries have become the head. Her enemies prosper. For Jehovah has afflicted her for the multitude of her transgressions. Her young sons have gone into captivity before the adversary.
And from the daughter of Zion all her majesty is departed. Her rulers have become like harts that find no pasture. And they have gone without strength before the pursuer.
Jerusalem remembers in the days of her affliction and of her miseries all her pleasant things that were from the days of old. When her people fell into the hand of the adversary, and none helped her, the adversaries saw her; they mocked at her desolations.
Jerusalem has grievously sinned, therefore she has become as an unclean thing. All who honored her despise her, because they have seen her nakedness. Yea, she sighs, and turns backward.
Her filthiness was in her skirts. She did not think of her latter end. Therefore she has come down astonishingly. She has no comforter. Behold, O Jehovah, my affliction, for the enemy has magnified himself.
The adversary has spread out his hand upon all her pleasant things. For she has seen that the nations have entered into her sanctuary, concerning whom thou commanded that they should not enter into thine assembly.
All her people sigh. They seek bread. They have given their pleasant things for food to refresh the soul. See, O Jehovah, and, behold, for I have become abject.
Is it nothing to you, all ye who pass by? Behold, and see if there is any sorrow like my sorrow, which is brought upon me. Therewith Jehovah has afflicted in the day of his fierce anger.
From on high he has sent fire into my bones, and it prevails against them. He has spread a net for my feet. He has turned me back. He has made me desolate and faint all the day.
The yoke of my transgressions is bound by his hand. They are knit together. They have come up upon my neck. He has made my strength to fail. The Lord has delivered me into their hands, against whom I am not able to stand.
The Lord has trodden under foot all my mighty men in the midst of me. He has called a solemn assembly against me to crush my young men. The Lord has trodden the virgin daughter of Judah as in a winepress.
For these things I weep. My eye, my eye runs down with water, because the comforter who should refresh my soul is far from me. My sons are desolate, because the enemy has prevailed.
Zion spreads forth her hands. There is none to comfort her. Jehovah has commanded concerning Jacob, that those who are round about him should be his adversaries. Jerusalem is among them as an unclean thing.
Jehovah is righteous, for I have rebelled against his commandment. Hear, I pray you, all ye peoples, and behold my sorrow. My virgins and my young men have gone into captivity.
I called for my loved ones, but they deceived me. My priests and my elders gave up the spirit in the city, while they sought food for themselves to refresh their souls.
Behold, O Jehovah, for I am in distress. My heart is troubled. My heart is turned within me. For I have grievously rebelled. Abroad the sword bereaves; at home there is as death.
They have heard that I sigh. There is none to comfort me. All my enemies have heard of my trouble. They are glad that thou have done it. Thou will bring the day that thou have proclaimed, and they shall be like me.
Let all their wickedness come before thee, and do to them, as thou have done to me for all my transgressions. For my sighs are many, and my heart is faint.

How the Lord has covered the daughter of Zion with a cloud in his anger! He has cast down the beauty of Israel from heaven to the earth, and has not remembered his footstool in the day of his anger.
The Lord has swallowed up all the habitations of Jacob, and has not pitied. In his wrath he has thrown down the strongholds of the daughter of Judah. He has brought them down to the ground. He has profaned the kingdom and the rulers thereof.
In fierce anger he has cut off all the horn of Israel. He has drawn back his right hand from before the enemy. And he has burned up Jacob like a flaming fire which devours round about.
He has bent his bow like an enemy. He has stood with his right hand as an adversary, and has slain all who were pleasant to the eye. He has poured out his wrath like fire in the tent of the daughter of Zion.
The Lord has become as an enemy. He has swallowed up Israel. He has swallowed up all her palaces. He has destroyed his strongholds. And he has multiplied mourning and lamentation in the daughter of Judah.
And he has taken away his tabernacle violently, as a garden. He has destroyed his place of assembly. Jehovah has caused solemn assembly and sabbath to be forgotten in Zion. And in the indignation of his anger has despised the king and the priest.
The Lord has cast off his altar. He has abhorred his sanctuary. He has given up the walls of her palaces into the hand of the enemy. They have made a noise in the house of Jehovah, as in the day of a solemn assembly.
Jehovah has purposed to destroy the wall of the daughter of Zion. He has stretched out the line. He has not withdrawn his hand from destroying. And he has made the rampart and wall to lament, they languish together.
Her gates are sunk into the ground. He has destroyed and broken her bars. Her king and her rulers are among the nations where the law is not. Yea, her prophets find no vision from Jehovah.
The elders of the daughter of Zion sit upon the ground. They keep silence. They have cast up dust upon their heads. They have girded themselves with sackcloth. The virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads to the ground.
My eyes fail with tears, my heart is troubled, my liver is poured upon the earth, because of the destruction of the daughter of my people, because the young sons and the sucklings faint in the streets of the city.
They say to their mothers, Where is grain and wine? when they faint as the wounded in the streets of the city, when their soul is poured out into their mothers' bosom.
What shall I testify to thee? What shall I liken to thee, O daughter of Jerusalem? What shall I compare to thee, that I may comfort thee, O virgin daughter of Zion? For thy breach is great like the sea; who can heal thee?
Thy prophets have seen false and foolish visions for thee. And they have not uncovered thine iniquity, to bring back thy captivity, but have seen for thee false oracles and causes of banishment.
All who pass by clap their hands at thee. They hiss and wag their head at the daughter of Jerusalem, saying, Is this the city that men called The perfection of beauty, The joy of the whole earth?
All thine enemies have opened their mouth wide against thee. They hiss and gnash the teeth. They say, We have swallowed her up. Certainly this is the day that we looked for. We have found, we have seen it.
Jehovah has done that which he purposed. He has fulfilled his word that he commanded in the days of old. He has thrown down, and has not pitied. And he has caused the enemy to rejoice over thee. He has exalted the horn of thine adversaries.
Their heart cried to the Lord. O wall of the daughter of Zion, let tears run down like a river day and night. Give thyself no respite. Let not the apple of thine eye cease.
Arise, cry out in the night, at the beginning of the watches. Pour out thy heart like water before the face of the Lord. Lift up thy hands toward him for the life of thy young sons, who faint for hunger at the head of every street.
See, O Jehovah, and behold to whom thou have done thus! Shall the women eat their fruit, the sons who are dandled in the hands? Shall the priest and the prophet be slain in the sanctuary of the Lord?
The youth and the old man lie on the ground in the streets. My virgins and my young men have fallen by the sword. Thou have slain them in the day of thine anger. Thou have slaughtered, and not pitied.
Thou have called, as in the day of a solemn assembly, my terrors on every side. And there was none who escaped or remained in the day of Jehovah's anger. My enemy has consumed those whom I have dandled and brought up.

I am the man who has seen affliction by the rod of his wrath.
He has led me and caused me to walk in darkness, and not in light.
Surely he turns his hand against me, again and again all the day.
He has made my flesh and my skin old. He has broken my bones.
He has built against me, and encompassed me with gall and travail.
He has made me to dwell in dark places, as those who have long been dead.
He has walled me around, that I cannot go forth. He has made my chain heavy.
Yea, when I cry, and call for help, he shuts out my prayer.
He has walled up my ways with hewn stone. He has made my paths crooked.
He is to me as a bear lying in wait, as a lion in concealed places.
He has turned aside my ways, and pulled me in pieces. He has made me desolate.
He has bent his bow, and set me as a mark for the arrow.
He has caused the shafts of his quiver to enter into my reins.
I have become a derision to all my people, and their song all the day.
He has filled me with bitterness. He has sated me with wormwood.
He has also broken my teeth with gravel stones. He has covered me with ashes.
And thou have removed my soul far off from peace. I forgot prosperity.
And I said, My strength is perished, and my expectation from Jehovah.
Remember my affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall.
My soul still has them in remembrance, and is bowed down within me.
It is of Jehovah's loving kindnesses that we are not consumed, because his compassions do not fail.
They are new every morning. Great is thy faithfulness.
Jehovah is my portion, says my soul, therefore I will hope in him.
Jehovah is good to those who wait for him, to the soul who seeks him.
It is good that a man should hope and quietly wait for the salvation of Jehovah.
It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth.
Let him sit alone and keep silence, because he has laid it upon him.
Let him put his mouth in the dust, if so be there may be hope.
Let him give his cheek to him who smites him. Let him be filled full with reproach.
For the Lord will not cast off forever.
For though he causes grief, yet he will have compassion according to the multitude of his loving kindnesses.
For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the sons of men.
To crush under foot all the prisoners of the earth,
to turn aside the right of a man before the face of the Most High,
to subvert a man in his cause, the Lord does not approve.
Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord does not command it?
Out of the mouth of the Most High does there not come evil and good?
Why does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins?
Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to Jehovah.
Let us lift up our heart with our hands to God in the heavens.
We have transgressed and have rebelled. Thou have not pardoned.
Thou have covered with anger and pursued us. Thou have slain; thou have not pitied.
Thou have covered thyself with a cloud, so that no prayer can pass through.
Thou have made us an off-scouring and refuse in the midst of the peoples.
All our enemies have opened their mouth wide against us.
Fear and the pit have come upon us, devastation and destruction.
My eye runs down with streams of water, for the destruction of the daughter of my people.
My eye pours down, and does not cease, without any intermission,
till Jehovah looks down, and beholds from heaven.
My eye stirs my soul, because of all the daughters of my city.
They have chased me grievously like a bird, those who are my enemies without cause.
They have cut off my life in the dungeon, and have cast a stone upon me.
Waters flowed over my head. I said, I am cut off.
I called upon thy name, O Jehovah, out of the lowest dungeon.
Thou heard my voice. Hide not thine ear at my breathing, at my cry.
Thou drew near in the day that I called upon thee. Thou said, Fear not.
O Lord, thou have pleaded the causes of my soul. Thou have redeemed my life.
O Jehovah, thou have seen my wrong. Judge thou my cause.
Thou have seen all their vengeance and all their devices against me.
Thou have heard their reproach, O Jehovah, and all their devices against me,
the lips of those who rose up against me, and their device against me all the day.
Behold thou their sitting down, and their rising up. I am their song.
Thou will render to them a recompense, O Jehovah, according to the work of their hands.
Thou will give them hardness of heart, thy curse to them.
Thou will pursue them in anger, and destroy them from under the heavens of Jehovah.

How the gold has become dim, the most pure gold changed! The stones of the sanctuary are poured out at the head of every street.
The precious sons of Zion, comparable to fine gold, how they are esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the potter!
Even the jackals draw out the breast; they give suck to their young ones. The daughter of my people has become cruel, like the ostriches in the wilderness.
The tongue of the sucking child clings to the roof of his mouth for thirst. The young sons ask bread, and no man breaks it to them.
Those who fed luxuriously are desolate in the streets. Those who were brought up in scarlet embrace dunghills.
For the iniquity of the daughter of my people is greater than the sin of Sodom, that was overthrown as in a moment, and no hands were laid upon her.
Her ranking men were purer than snow. They were whiter than milk. They were more ruddy in body than rubies. Their polishing was as of sapphire.
Their visage is blacker than a coal. They are not known in the streets. Their skin clings to their bones. It is withered. It has become like a stick.
Those who are slain with the sword are better than those who are slain with hunger, for these pine away, stricken through, for want of the fruits of the field.
The hands of the pitiful women have boiled their own children. They were their food in the destruction of the daughter of my people.
Jehovah has accomplished his wrath. He has poured out his fierce anger, and he has kindled a fire in Zion, which has devoured the foundations thereof.
The kings of the earth did not believe, nor all the inhabitants of the world, that the adversary and the enemy would enter into the gates of Jerusalem.
It is because of the sins of her prophets, and the iniquities of her priests, who have shed the blood of the just in the midst of her.
They wander as blind men in the streets. They are polluted with blood, so that men cannot touch their garments.
Depart ye, they cried to them. Unclean! Depart, depart, do not touch! When they fled away and wandered, men said among the nations, They shall no more sojourn here.
The anger of Jehovah has scattered them. He will no more regard them. They did not respect the persons of the priests. They did not favor the elders.
Our eyes do yet fail in looking for our vain help. In our watching we have watched for a nation that could not save.
They hunt our steps, so that we cannot go in our streets. Our end is near, our days are fulfilled, for our end has come.
Our pursuers were swifter than the eagles of the heavens. They chased us upon the mountains. They laid wait for us in the wilderness.
The breath of our nostrils, the anointed of Jehovah, was taken in their pits, of whom we said, Under his shadow we shall live among the nations.
Rejoice and be glad, O daughter of Edom, who dwells in the land of Uz. Yet the cup shall pass through to thee also. Thou shall be drunken, and shall make thyself naked.
The punishment of thine iniquity is accomplished, O daughter of Zion. He will no more carry thee away into captivity. He will visit thine iniquity, O daughter of Edom. He will uncover thy sins.

Remember, O Jehovah, what has come upon us. Behold, and see our reproach.
Our inheritance is turned to strangers, our houses to aliens.
We are orphans and fatherless. Our mothers are as widows.
We have drunken our water for money. Our wood is sold to us.
Our pursuers are upon our necks. We are weary, and have no rest.
We have given the hand to the Egyptians, and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread.
Our fathers sinned, and are not, and we have borne their iniquities.
Servants rule over us. There is none to deliver us out of their hand.
We get our bread at the peril of our lives, because of the sword of the wilderness.
Our skin is black like an oven, because of the burning heat of famine.
They ravished the women in Zion, the virgins in the cities of Judah.
Rulers were hanged up by their hand. The faces of elders were not honored.
The young men bore the mill, and the sons stumbled under the wood.
The elders have ceased from the gate, the young men from their music.
The joy of our heart is ceased, our dance is turned into mourning.
The crown has fallen from our head. Woe to us! For we have sinned.
For this our heart is faint. For these things our eyes are dim,
for the mountain of Zion, which is desolate. The foxes walk upon it.
Thou, O Jehovah, abide forever. Thy throne is from generation to generation.
Why do thou forget us forever, and forsake us so long time?
Turn thou us back to thee, O Jehovah, and we shall be turned back. Renew our days as of old.
But thou have utterly rejected us. Thou are very angry against us.

Ezekiel

Now it came to pass in the thirtieth year, in the fourth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I was among the captives by the river Chebar, that the heavens were opened, and I saw visions of God.
In the fifth day of the month, which was the fifth year of king Jehoiachin's captivity,
the word of Jehovah came expressly to Ezekiel the priest, the son of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans by the river Chebar, and the hand of Jehovah was there upon him.
And I looked, and, behold, a stormy wind came out of the north, a great cloud, with a fire enfolding itself, and a brightness round about it, and out of the midst of it, as it were glowing metal, out of the midst of the fire.
And out of the midst of it came the likeness of four living creatures. And this was their appearance. They had the likeness of a man.
And each one had four faces, and each one of them had four wings.
And their feet were straight feet, and the sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot, and they sparkled like burnished brass.
Their wings were joined one to another. They did not turn when they went; they went each one straight forward.
As for the likeness of their faces, they had the face of a man. And those four had the face of a lion on the right side, and those four had the face of an ox on the left side, those four also had the face of an eagle.
And their faces and their wings were separate above, two wings of each one were joined one to another, and two covered their bodies.
And they went each one straight forward. Where the spirit was to go, they went. They did not turn when they went.
As for the likeness of the living creatures, their appearance was like burning coals of fire, like the appearance of torches. It went up and down among the living creatures, and the fire was bright, and out of the fire went forth lightning.
And the living creatures ran and returned as the appearance of a flash of lightning.
Now as I beheld the living creatures, behold, one wheel was upon the earth beside the living creatures, for each of the four faces of it.
The appearance of the wheels and their work was like a beryl. And those four had one likeness, and their appearance and their work was as it were a wheel within a wheel.
When they went, they went in their four directions. They did not turn when they went.
As for their rims, they were high and fearful. And those four had their rims full of eyes round about.
And when the living creatures went, the wheels went beside them. And when the living creatures were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up.
Wherever the spirit was to go, they went; there the spirit was to go. And the wheels were lifted up beside them, for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
When those went, these went, and when those stood, these stood, and when those were lifted up from the earth, the wheels were lifted up beside them, for the spirit of the living creature was in the wheels.
And over the head of the living creature there was the likeness of a firmament, like awesome crystal to look upon, stretched forth over their heads above.
And under the firmament their wings were straight, the one toward the other. Each one had two which covered their bodies on this side, and each one had two which covered on that side.
And when they went, I heard the noise of their wings like the noise of great waters, like the voice of the Almighty, a noise of tumult like the noise of a host. When they stood, they let down their wings.
And there was a voice above the firmament that was over their heads. When they stood, they let down their wings.
And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne, as the appearance of a sapphire stone. And upon the likeness of the throne was a likeness as the appearance of a man upon it above.
And I saw as it were glowing metal, as the appearance of fire within it round about, from the appearance of his loins and upward. And from the appearance of his loins and downward I saw as it were the appearance of fire. And there was brightness round about him.
As the appearance of the bow that is in the cloud in the day of rain, so was the appearance of the brightness round about. This was the appearance of the likeness of the glory of Jehovah. And when I saw it, I fell upon my face, and I heard a voice speaking.

And he said to me, Son of man, stand upon thy feet, and I will speak with thee.
And the Spirit entered into me when he spoke to me, and set me upon my feet. And I heard him who spoke to me.
And he said to me, Son of man, I send thee to the sons of Israel, to nations that are rebellious, which have rebelled against me. They and their fathers have transgressed against me even to this very day.
And the sons are impudent and stiff hearted. I send thee to them, and thou shall say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah.
And they, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear (for they are a rebellious house), yet shall know that there has been a prophet among them.
And thou, son of man, be not afraid of them, nor be afraid of their words, though briers and thorns are with thee, and thou dwell among scorpions. Be not afraid of their words, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they are a rebellious house.
And thou shall speak my words to them, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, for they are most rebellious.
But thou, son of man, hear what I say to thee. Be not thou rebellious like that rebellious house. Open thy mouth, and eat that which I give thee.
And when I looked, behold, a hand was put forth to me, and, lo, a roll of a book was in it,
And he spread it before me, and it was written inside and outside. And there were written in it lamentations and mourning and woe.

And he said to me, Son of man, eat that which thou find. Eat this roll, and go, speak to the house of Israel.
So I opened my mouth, and he caused me to eat the roll.
And he said to me, Son of man, cause thy belly to eat, and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee. Then I ate it, and it was in my mouth as honey for sweetness.
And he said to me, Son of man, go, get thee to the house of Israel, and speak to them with my words.
For thou are not sent to a people of a strange speech and of a hard language, but to the house of Israel,
not to many peoples of a strange speech, and of a hard language, whose words thou cannot understand. Surely, if I sent thee to them, they would hearken to thee.
But the house of Israel will not hearken to thee, for they will not hearken to me. For all the house of Israel are of a hard forehead and of a stiff heart.
Behold, I have made thy face hard against their faces, and thy forehead hard against their foreheads.
As an adamant, harder than flint, I have made thy forehead. Fear them not, nor be dismayed at their looks, though they are a rebellious house.
Moreover he said to me, Son of man, all my words that I shall speak to thee, receive in thy heart, and hear with thine ears.
And go, get thee to those of the captivity, to the sons of thy people, and speak to them, and tell them, Thus says the lord Jehovah, whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear.
Then the Spirit lifted me up, and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing, saying, Blessed be the glory of Jehovah from his place.
And I heard the noise of the wings of the living creatures as they touched each other, and the noise of the wheels beside them, even the noise of a great rushing.
So the Spirit lifted me up, and took me away. And I went in bitterness, in the heat of my spirit, and the hand of Jehovah was strong upon me.
Then I came to those of the captivity at Tel-abib, who dwelt by the river Chebar, and to where they dwelt. And I sat there overwhelmed among them seven days.
And it came to pass at the end of seven days, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, I have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel. Therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.
When I say to a wicked man, Thou shall surely die, and thou give him no warning, nor speak to warn the wicked man from his wicked way, to save his life, the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but I will require his blood at thy hand.
Yet if thou warn the wicked man, and he does not turn from his wickedness, nor from his wicked way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.
Again, when a righteous man turns from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and I lay a stumbling block before him, he shall die. Because thou have not given him warning, he shall die in his sin, and his righteous deeds which he has done shall not be remembered, but I will require his blood at thy hand.
Nevertheless if thou warn the righteous man, that the righteous man not sin, and he does not sin, he shall surely live, because he took warning, and thou have delivered thy soul.
And the hand of Jehovah was there upon me, and he said to me, Arise, go forth into the plain, and I will talk with thee there.
Then I arose, and went forth into the plain. And, behold, the glory of Jehovah stood there, as the glory which I saw by the river Chebar, and I fell on my face.
Then the Spirit entered into me, and set me upon my feet. And he spoke with me, and said to me, Go, shut thyself within thy house.
But thou, son of man, behold, they shall lay bands upon thee, and shall bind thee with them, and thou shall not escape from them.
And I will make thy tongue cling to the roof of thy mouth, that thou shall be mute, and shall not be a reprover to them, for they are a rebellious house.
But when I speak with thee, I will open thy mouth, and thou shall say to them, Thus says the lord Jehovah. He who hears, let him hear, and he who forbears, let him forbear, for they are a rebellious house.

Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile, and lay it before thee, and portray upon it a city, even Jerusalem.
And lay siege against it, and build forts against it, and cast up a mound against it. Also set camps against it, and plant battering rams against it round about.
And take thou to thee an iron pan, and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city. And set thy face toward it, and it shall be besieged, and thou shall lay siege against it. This shall be a sign to the house of Israel.
Moreover lie thou upon thy left side, and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it. According to the number of the days that thou shall lie upon it, thou shall bear their iniquity.
For I have appointed the years of their iniquity to be a number of days to thee, even three hundred and ninety days. So thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of Israel.
And again, when thou have accomplished these, thou shall lie on thy right side, and shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days, each day for a year. I have appointed it to thee.
And thou shall set thy face toward the siege of Jerusalem, with thine arm uncovered, and thou shall prophesy against it.
And, behold, I lay bands upon thee, and thou shall not turn thee from one side to the other, till thou have accomplished the days of thy siege.
Also take thou to thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentils, and millet, and spelt, and put them in one vessel, and make thee bread of it, according to the number of the days that thou shall lie upon thy side, even three hundred and ninety days, thou shall eat of it.
And thy food which thou shall eat shall be by weight, twenty shekels a day. Thou shall eat it from time to time.
And thou shall drink water by measure, the sixth part of a hin. Thou shall drink from time to time.
And thou shall eat it as barley cakes, and thou shall bake it in their sight with dung that comes out of man.
And Jehovah said, Even thus shall the sons of Israel eat their bread unclean among the nations where I will drive them.
Then I said, Ah lord Jehovah! Behold, my soul has not been polluted. For from my youth up even till now I have not eaten of that which dies of itself, or is torn of beasts, neither has abominable flesh come into my mouth.
Then he said to me, See, I have given thee cow's dung for man's dung, and thou shall prepare thy bread of it.
Moreover he said to me, Son of man, behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem, and they shall eat bread by weight, and with fearfulness, and they shall drink water by measure, and in dismay,
that they may lack bread and water, and be dismayed one with another, and pine away in their iniquity.

And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp sword. As a barber's razor thou shall take it to thee, and shall cause it to pass upon thy head and upon thy beard. Then take thee balances to weigh and divide the hair.
A third part thou shall burn in the fire in the midst of the city when the days of the siege are fulfilled, and thou shall take a third part, and smite with the sword round about it, and a third part thou shall scatter to the wind. And I will draw out a sword after them.
And thou shall take from it a few in number, and bind them in thy skirts.
And of these again thou shall take, and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire. From there a fire shall come forth into all the house of Israel.
This is Jerusalem. I have set her in the midst of the nations, and countries are round about her.
And she has rebelled against my ordinances in doing wickedness more than the nations, and against my statutes more than the countries that are round about her, for they have rejected my ordinances, and as for my statutes, they have not walked in them.
Because ye are more disorderly than the nations that are round about you, and have not walked in my statutes, nor have kept my ordinances, no, ye have not even done according to the ordinances of the nations that are round about you,
Behold, I, even I, am against thee, and I will execute judgments in the midst of thee in the sight of the nations.
And I will do in thee that which I have not done, and of which I will not do any more the like, because of all thine abominations.
Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee, and the sons shall eat their fathers. And I will execute judgments on thee, and I will scatter to all the winds the whole remnant of thee.
Therefore, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, surely, because thou have defiled my sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all thine abominations, therefore I also will diminish thee, nor shall my eye spare. And I also will have no pity.
A third part of thee shall die with the pestilence, and they shall be consumed with famine in the midst of thee, and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee, and a third part I will scatter to all the winds, and will draw out a sword after them.
Thus my anger shall be accomplished, and I will cause my wrath toward them to rest, and I shall be comforted. And they shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken in my zeal, when I have accomplished my wrath upon them.
Moreover I will make thee a desolation and a reproach among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight of all who pass by.
So it shall be a reproach and a taunt, a lesson and an astonishment, to the nations that are round about thee, when I shall execute judgments on thee in anger and in wrath, and in wrathful rebukes-I, Jehovah, have spoken it-
when I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famine that are for destruction, which I will send to destroy you. And I will increase the famine upon you, and will break your staff of bread.
And I will send upon you famine and evil beasts, and they shall bereave thee. And pestilence and blood shall pass through thee. And I will bring the sword upon thee. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, set thy face toward the mountains of Israel, and prophesy to them,
Behold, I, even I, will bring a sword upon you, and I will destroy your high places.
And your altars shall become desolate, and your sun-images shall be broken, and I will cast down your slain men before your idols.
And I will lay the dead bodies of the sons of Israel before their idols, and I will scatter your bones round about your altars.
In all your dwelling places the cities shall be laid waste, and the high places shall be desolate, that your altars may be laid waste and made desolate, and your idols may be broken and cease, and your sun-images may be hewn down, and your works may be abolished.
And the slain shall fall in the midst of you. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Yet I will leave a remnant, in that ye shall have some who escape the sword among the nations, when ye shall be scattered through the countries.
And those of you who escape shall remember me among the nations where they shall be carried captive, how I have broken with their lewd heart, which has departed from me, and with their eyes, which play the harlot after their idols. And they shall loathe themselves in their own sight for the evils which they have committed in all their abominations.
And they shall know that I am Jehovah. I have not said in vain that I would do this evil to them.
Smite with thy hand, and stamp with thy foot, and say, Alas! because of all the evil abominations of the house of Israel, for they shall fall by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence.
He who is far off shall die of the pestilence, and he who is near shall fall by the sword, and he who remains and is besieged shall die by the famine. Thus I will accomplish my wrath upon them.
And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when their slain men shall be among their idols round about their altars, upon every high hill, on all the tops of the mountains, and under every green tree, and under every thick oak, the places where they offered sweet savor to all their idols.
And I will stretch out my hand upon them, and make the land desolate and waste, from the wilderness toward Diblah, throughout all their habitations. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.

Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
An end. The end has come upon the four corners of the land.
Now the end is upon thee, and I will send my anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways. And I will bring upon thee all thine abominations.
And my eye shall not spare thee, nor will I have pity. But I will bring thy ways upon thee, and thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
An evil, an only evil, behold, it comes.
An end has come. The end has come. It awakens against thee. Behold, it comes.
Thy doom has come to thee, O inhabitant of the land. The time has come. The day is near, tumult, and not joyful shouting, upon the mountains.
Now I will shortly pour out my wrath upon thee, and accomplish my anger against thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways. And I will bring upon thee all thine abominations.
And my eye shall not spare, nor will I have pity. I will bring upon thee according to thy ways. And thine abominations shall be in the midst of thee. And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, do smite.
Behold, the day, behold, it comes. Thy doom has gone forth. The rod has blossomed; pride has budded.
Violence has risen up into a rod of wickedness. None of them shall remain, nor of their multitude, nor of their wealth. Neither shall there be eminency among them.
The time has come; the day draws near. Let not the buyer rejoice, nor the seller mourn, for wrath is upon all the multitude of it.
For the seller shall not return to that which is sold, although they be yet alive, for the vision is concerning the whole multitude of it. None shall return, nor shall any strengthen himself in the iniquity of his life.
They have blown the trumpet, and have made all ready, but none goes to the battle, for my wrath is upon all the multitude of it.
The sword is outside, and the pestilence and the famine inside. He who is in the field shall die with the sword, and he who is in the city, famine and pestilence shall devour him.
But those of them who escape shall escape, and shall be on the mountains like doves of the valleys. All of them moaning, each one in his iniquity.
All hands shall be feeble, and all knees shall be weak as water.
They shall also gird themselves with sackcloth, and horror shall cover them. And shame shall be upon all faces, and baldness upon all their heads.
They shall cast their silver in the streets, and their gold shall be as an unclean thing. Their silver and their gold shall not be able to deliver them in the day of the wrath of Jehovah. They shall not satisfy their souls, nor fill their bowels, because it has been the stumbling block of their iniquity.
As for the beauty of his ornament, he set it in majesty, but they made the images of their abominations, and their detestable things in it. Therefore I have made it as an unclean thing to them.
And I will give it into the hands of the strangers for a prey, and to the wicked of the earth for a spoil, and they shall profane it.
I will also turn my face from them, and they shall profane my secluded place. And robbers shall enter into it, and profane it.
Make the chain, for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence.
Therefore I will bring the worst of the nations, and they shall possess their houses. I will also make the pride of the strong to cease, and their holy places shall be profaned.
Destruction comes. And they shall seek peace, and there shall be none.
Mischief shall come upon mischief, and rumor shall be upon rumor. And they shall seek a vision of the prophet, but the law shall perish from the priest, and counsel from the elders.
The king shall mourn, and the ruler shall be clothed with desolation, and the hands of the people of the land shall be troubled. I will do to them according to their way, and according to their deserts I will judge them. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.

And it came to pass in the sixth year, in the sixth month, in the fifth day of the month, as I sat in my house, and the elders of Judah sat before me, that the hand of the lord Jehovah fell there upon me.
Then I beheld, and, lo, a likeness as the appearance of fire, from the appearance of his loins and downward, fire, and from his loins and upward, as the appearance of brightness, as it were glowing metal.
And he put forth the form of a hand, and took me by a lock of my head. And the Spirit lifted me up between earth and heaven, and brought me in the visions of God to Jerusalem, to the door of the gate of the inner court that looks toward the north, where the seat of the image of jealousy was, which provokes to jealousy.
And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel was there, according to the appearance that I saw in the plain.
Then he said to me, Son of man, lift up thine eyes now the way toward the north. So I lifted up my eyes the way toward the north, and, behold, northward of the gate of the altar was this image of jealousy in the entry.
And he said to me, Son of man, see thou what they do, even the great abominations that the house of Israel commit here, that I should go far off from my sanctuary? But thou shall again see yet other great abominations.
And he brought me to the door of the court. And when I looked, behold, a hole in the wall.
Then he said to me, Son of man, dig now in the wall. And when I had dug in the wall, behold, a door.
And he said to me, Go in, and see the wicked abominations that they do here.
So I went in and saw, and, behold, every form of creeping things, and abominable beasts, and all the idols of the house of Israel, portrayed upon the wall round about.
And there stood before them seventy men of the elders of the house of Israel. And in the midst of them stood Jaazaniah the son of Shaphan, each man with his censer in his hand, and the odor of the cloud of incense went up.
Then he said to me, Son of man, have thou seen what the elders of the house of Israel do in the dark, each man in his chambers of imagery? For they say, Jehovah does not see us. Jehovah has forsaken the land.
He also said to me, Thou shall again see yet other great abominations which they do.
Then he brought me to the door of the gate of Jehovah's house which was toward the north. And, behold, there sat the women weeping for Tammuz.
Then he said to me, Have thou seen this, O son of man? Thou shall again see yet greater abominations than these.
And he brought me into the inner court of Jehovah's house. And, behold, at the door of the temple of Jehovah, between the porch and the altar, were about twenty-five men with their backs toward the temple of Jehovah, and their faces toward the east, and they were worshiping the sun toward the east.
Then he said to me, Have thou seen this, O son of man? Is it a light thing to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they commit here? For they have filled the land with violence, and have turned again to provoke me to anger. And, lo, they put the branch to their nose.
Therefore I will also deal in wrath. My eye shall not spare, nor will I have pity. And though they cry in my ears with a loud voice, yet I will not hear them.

Then he cried in my ears with a loud voice, saying, Cause ye those who have charge over the city to draw near, each man with his destroying weapon in his hand.
And, behold, six men came from the way of the upper gate, which lies toward the north, each man with his slaughter weapon in his hand, and one man in the midst of them clothed in linen, with a writer's case by his side. And they went in, and stood beside the brazen altar.
And the glory of the God of Israel went up from the cherub, upon which it was, to the threshold of the house, and he called to the man clothed in linen who had the writer's case by his side.
And Jehovah said to him, Go through the midst of the city, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men who sigh and who cry over all the abominations that are done in the midst of it.
And to the others he said in my hearing, Go ye through the city after him, and smite. Let not your eye spare, nor have ye pity.
Kill utterly the old man, the young man, and the virgin, and little sons, and women, but come not near any man upon whom is the mark. And begin at my sanctuary. Then they began at the old men who were before the house.
And he said to them, Defile the house, and fill the courts with the slain. Go ye forth. And they went forth, and smote in the city.
And it came to pass, while they were smiting, and I was left, that I fell upon my face, and cried, and said, Ah lord Jehovah! Will thou destroy all the residue of Israel in thy pouring out of thy wrath upon Jerusalem?
Then he said to me, The iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceedingly great, and the land is full of blood, and the city full of perverseness. For they say, Jehovah has forsaken the land, and Jehovah does not see.
And as for me also, my eye shall not spare, nor will I have pity, but I will bring their way upon their head.
And, behold, the man clothed in linen, who had the writing case by his side, reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou have commanded me.

Then I looked, and, behold, in the firmament that was over the head of the cherubim there appeared above them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance of the likeness of a throne.
And he spoke to the man clothed in linen, and said, Go in between the whirling wheels, even under the cherub, and fill both thy hands with coals of fire from between the cherubim, and scatter them over the city. And he went in in my sight.
Now the cherubim stood on the right side of the house when the man went in, and the cloud filled the inner court.
And the glory of Jehovah mounted up from the cherub, over the threshold of the house. And the house was filled with the cloud, and the court was full of the brightness of Jehovah's glory.
And the sound of the wings of the cherubim was heard even to the outer court, as the voice of God Almighty when he speaks.
And it came to pass, when he commanded the man clothed in linen, saying, Take fire from between the whirling wheels, from between the cherubim, that he went in, and stood beside a wheel.
And the cherub stretched forth his hand from between the cherubim to the fire that was between the cherubim, and took, and put it into the hands of him who was clothed in linen, who took it and went out.
And there appeared in the cherubim the form of a man's hand under their wings.
And I looked, and, behold, four wheels beside the cherubim, one wheel beside one cherub, and another wheel beside another cherub. And the appearance of the wheels was like a beryl stone.
And as for their appearance, those four had one likeness, as if a wheel have been within a wheel.
When they went, they went in their four directions. They did not turn as they went, but to the place where the head looked they followed it. They did not turn as they went.
And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their wings, and the wheels, were full of eyes round about, even the wheels that those four had.
As for the wheels, they were called in my hearing, O wheel.
And each one had four faces. The first face was the face of the cherub, and the second face was the face of a man, and the third face the face of a lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle.
And the cherubim mounted up. This is the living creature that I saw by the river Chebar.
And when the cherubim went, the wheels went beside them. And when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth, the wheels also did not turn from beside them.
When they stood, these stood, and when they mounted up, these mounted up with them, for the spirit of the living creature was in them.
And the glory of Jehovah went forth from over the threshold of the house, and stood over the cherubim.
And the cherubim lifted up their wings, and mounted up from the earth in my sight when they went forth, and the wheels beside them. And they stood at the door of the east gate of Jehovah's house, and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.
This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel by the river Chebar, and I knew that they were cherubim.
Each one had four faces, and each one four wings. And the likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings.
And as for the likeness of their faces, they were the faces which I saw by the river Chebar, their appearances and themselves. They went each one straight forward.

Moreover the Spirit lifted me up, and brought me to the east gate of Jehovah's house, which looks eastward. And, behold, at the door of the gate twenty-five men. And I saw in the midst of them Jaazaniah the son of Azzur, and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah, rulers of the people.
And he said to me, Son of man, these are the men who devise iniquity, and who give wicked counsel in this city,
who say, The time is not near to build houses. This city is the caldron, and we are the flesh.
Therefore prophesy against them. Prophesy, O son of man.
Thus ye have said, O house of Israel, for I know the things that come into your mind.
Ye have multiplied your slain in this city, and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain.
Your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh, and this city is the caldron, but ye shall be brought forth out of the midst of it.
Ye have feared the sword, and I will bring the sword upon you, says the lord Jehovah.
And I will bring you forth out of the midst of it, and deliver you into the hands of strangers, and will execute judgments among you.
Ye shall fall by the sword. I will judge you in the border of Israel, and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
This city shall not be your caldron, nor shall ye be the flesh in the midst thereof. I will judge you in the border of Israel,
and ye shall know that I am Jehovah. For ye have not walked in my statutes, nor have ye executed my ordinances, but have done according to the ordinances of the nations that are round about you.
And it came to pass, when I prophesied, that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died. Then I fell down upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and said, Ah lord Jehovah! Will thou make a full end of the remnant of Israel?
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, thy brothers, even thy brothers, the men of thy kindred, and all the house of Israel, all of them, are those to whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, Get you far from Jehovah. This land is given to us for a possession.
Whereas I have removed them far off among the nations, and whereas I have scattered them among the countries, yet I will be to them a sanctuary for a little while in the countries where they have come.
Therefore say, Thus says the lord Jehovah. I will gather you from the peoples, and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered, and I will give you the land of Israel.
And they shall come there, and they shall take away from there all the detestable things of it and all the abominations of it.
And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you. And I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them a heart of flesh,
that they may walk in my statutes, and keep my ordinances, and do them. And they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
But as for those whose heart walks according to the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I will bring their way upon their own heads, says the lord Jehovah.
Then the cherubim lifted up their wings, and the wheels were beside them, and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above.
And the glory of Jehovah went up from the midst of the city, and stood upon the mountain which is on the east side of the city.
And the Spirit lifted me up, and brought me in the vision by the Spirit of God into Chaldea, to those of the captivity. So the vision that I had seen went up from me.
Then I spoke to those of the captivity all the things that Jehovah had shown me.

The word of Jehovah also came to me, saying,
Son of man, thou dwell in the midst of the rebellious house, that have eyes to see, and see not, that have ears to hear, and hear not, for they are a rebellious house.
Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thee stuff for moving, and move by day in their sight. And thou shall move from thy place to another place in their sight. It may be they will consider, though they are a rebellious house.
And thou shall bring forth thy stuff by day in their sight, as stuff for moving. And thou shall go forth thyself at evening in their sight, as when men go forth into exile.
Dig thou through the wall in their sight, and carry out by that.
Thou shall bear it upon thy shoulder in their sight, and carry it forth in the dark. Thou shall cover thy face, that thou not see the land. For I have set thee for a sign to the house of Israel.
And I did so as I was commanded. I brought forth my stuff by day, as stuff for moving, and in the evening I dug through the wall with my hand. I brought it forth in the dark, and bore it upon my shoulder in their sight.
And in the morning the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, has not the house of Israel, the rebellious house, said to thee, What are thou doing?
This burden concerns the ruler in Jerusalem, and all the house of Israel among whom they are.
Say, I am your sign. Just as I have done, so shall it be done to them. They shall go into exile, into captivity.
And the ruler who is among them shall bear upon his shoulder in the dark, and shall go forth. They shall dig through the wall to carry out by it. He shall cover his face, because he shall not see the land with his eyes.
I will also spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare. And I will bring him to Babylon to the land of the Chaldeans, yet he shall not see it, though he shall die there.
And I will scatter toward every wind all who are round about him to help him, and all his groups. And I will draw out the sword after them.
And they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall disperse them among the nations, and scatter them through the countries.
But I will leave a few men of them from the sword, from the famine, and from the pestilence, that they may declare all their abominations among the nations where they come. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, eat thy bread with quaking, and drink thy water with trembling and with fearfulness.
They shall eat their bread with fearfulness, and drink their water in dismay, that her land may be desolate of all that is in it, because of the violence of all those who dwell therein.
And the cities that are inhabited shall be laid waste, and the land shall be a desolation. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, what is this proverb that ye have in the land of Israel, saying, The days are prolonged, and every vision fails?
I will make this proverb to cease, and they shall no more use it as a proverb in Israel, but say to them, The days are at hand, and the fulfillment of every vision.
For there shall no more be any false vision nor flattering divination within the house of Israel.
For I am Jehovah. I will speak, and the word that I shall speak shall be performed. It shall be no more deferred. For in your days, O rebellious house, I will speak the word, and will perform it, says the lord Jehovah.
Again the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, behold, those of the house of Israel say, The vision that he sees is for many day to come, and he prophesies of times that are far off.
There shall none of my words be deferred any more, but the word which I shall speak shall be performed, says the lord Jehovah.

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, prophesy against the prophets of Israel who prophesy, and say thou to those who prophesy out of their own heart, Hear ye the word of Jehovah.
Woe to the foolish prophets, who follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing!
O Israel, thy prophets have been like foxes in the waste places.
Ye have not gone up into the gaps, nor built up the wall for the house of Israel to stand in the battle in the day of Jehovah.
They have seen falsehood and lying divination, who say, Jehovah says, but Jehovah has not sent them. And they have made men to hope that the word would be confirmed.
Have ye not seen a false vision, and have ye not spoken a lying divination, in that ye say, Jehovah says, albeit I have not spoken?
Because ye have spoken falsehood, and seen lies, therefore, behold, I am against you, says the lord Jehovah.
And my hand shall be against the prophets who see false visions, and who divine lies. They shall not be in the council of my people, nor shall they be written in the writing of the house of Israel, neither shall they enter into the land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.
Because, even because they have seduced my people, saying, Peace, and there is no peace, and when a man builds up a wall, behold, they daub it with untempered mortar,
say to those who daub it with untempered mortar, that it shall fall. There shall be an overflowing shower, and ye, O great hailstones, shall fall, and a stormy wind shall rend it.
Lo, when the wall has fallen, shall it not be said to you, Where is the daubing with which ye have daubed it?
I will even rend it with a stormy wind in my wrath, and there shall be an overflowing shower in my anger, and great hailstones in wrath to consume it.
So I will break down the wall that ye have daubed with untempered mortar, and bring it down to the ground, so that the foundation thereof shall be uncovered. And it shall fall, and ye shall be consumed in the midst of it. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Thus I will accomplish my wrath upon the wall, and upon those who have daubed it with untempered mortar. And I will say to you, The wall is no more, nor those who daubed it,
namely, the prophets of Israel who prophesy concerning Jerusalem, and who see visions of peace for her, and there is no peace, says the lord Jehovah.
And thou, son of man, set thy face against the daughters of thy people, who prophesy out of their own heart, and prophesy thou against them.
Woe to the women who sew pillows upon all elbows, and make headdresses for the head of every stature to hunt souls! Will ye hunt the souls of my people, and save souls alive for yourselves?
And ye have profaned me among my people for handfuls of barley and for pieces of bread, to kill the souls who should not die, and to save the souls alive who should not live, by your lying to my people who listen to lies.
Behold, I am against your pillows, with which ye hunt the souls there to make fly, and I will tear them from your arms. And I will let the souls go, even the souls that ye hunt to make fly.
I will also tear your headdresses, and deliver my people out of your hand, and they shall no more be in your hand to be hunted. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Because with lies ye have grieved the heart of the righteous, whom I have not made sad, and strengthened the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked way, and be saved alive.
Therefore ye shall no more see false visions, nor divine divinations. And I will deliver my people out of your hand. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.

Then certain of the elders of Israel came to me, and sat before me.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, these men have taken their idols into their heart, and put the stumbling block of their iniquity before their face. Should I be inquired of at all by them?
Every man of the house of Israel who takes his idols into his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and comes to the prophet, I Jehovah will answer him in it according to the multitude of his idols,
that I may take the house of Israel in their own heart, because they are all estranged from me through their idols.
Return ye, and turn yourselves from your idols, and turn away your faces from all your abominations.
For everyone of the house of Israel, or of the strangers who sojourn in Israel, that separates himself from me, and takes his idols into his heart, and puts the stumbling block of his iniquity before his face, and comes to the prophet to inquire for himself of me, I Jehovah will answer him by myself.
And I will set my face against that man, and will make him an astonishment, for a sign and a proverb. And I will cut him off from the midst of my people. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
And if the prophet is deceived and speaks a word, I, Jehovah, have deceived that prophet. And I will stretch out my hand upon him, and will destroy him from the midst of my people Israel.
And they shall bear their iniquity. The iniquity of the prophet shall be even as the iniquity of him who seeks him,
that the house of Israel may no more go astray from me, nor defile themselves any more with all their transgressions, but that they may be my people, and I may be their God, says the lord Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, when a land sins against me by committing a trespass, and I stretch out my hand upon it, and break the staff of the bread thereof, and send famine upon it, and cut off from it man and beast,
though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, they would deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, says the lord Jehovah.
If I cause evil beasts to pass through the land, and they ravage it, and it be made desolate, so that no man may pass through because of the beasts,
though these three men were in it, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, they would deliver neither sons nor daughters, they only would be delivered, but the land would be desolate.
Or if I bring a sword upon that land, and say, Sword, go through the land, so that I cut off from it man and beast,
though these three men were in it, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, they would deliver neither sons nor daughters, but they only would be delivered themselves.
Or if I send a pestilence into that land, and pour out my wrath upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and beast,
though Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in it, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, they would deliver neither son nor daughter, they would but deliver their own souls by their righteousness.
How much more when I send my four severe judgments upon Jerusalem, the sword, and the famine, and the evil beasts, and the pestilence, to cut off from it man and beast!
Yet, behold, there shall be left a remnant in it that shall be carried forth, both sons and daughters. Behold, they shall come forth to you, and ye shall see their way and their doings. And ye shall be comforted concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, even concerning all that I have brought upon it.
And they shall comfort you when ye see their way and their doings. And ye shall know that I have not done all that I have done in it without cause, says the lord Jehovah.

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, what is the vine tree more than any tree, the vine branch which is among the trees of the forest?
Shall wood be taken of it to make any work? Or will men take a pin of it to hang any vessel thereon?
Behold, it is cast into the fire for fuel. The fire has devoured both the ends of it, and the midst of it is burned. Is it profitable for any work?
Behold, when it was whole, it was fit for no work. How much less, when the fire has devoured it, and it is burned, shall it yet be fit for any work!
As the vine tree among the trees of the forest, which I have given to the fire for fuel, so I will give the inhabitants of Jerusalem.
And I will set my face against them. They shall go forth from the fire, but the fire shall devour them. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when I set my face against them.
And I will make the land desolate because they have committed a trespass, says the lord Jehovah.

Again the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, cause Jerusalem to know her abominations,
Thy birth and thy nativity is from the land of the Canaanite. The Amorite was thy father, and thy mother was a Hittite.
And as for thy nativity, in the day thou were born thy navel was not cut, nor were thou washed in water to cleanse thee. Thou were not salted at all, nor swaddled at all.
No eye pitied thee, to do any of these things to thee, to have compassion upon thee, but thou were cast out in the open field. For thy person was abhorred, in the day that thou were born.
And when I passed by thee, and saw thee weltering in thy blood, I said to thee, in thy blood, Live! Yea, I said to thee, in thy blood, Live!
I caused thee to multiply as that which grows in the field, and thou increased and grew great. And thou attained to excellent ornament, thy breasts were fashioned, and thy hair was grown. Yet thou were naked and bare.
Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold, thy time was the time of love. And I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy nakedness. Yea, I swore to thee, and entered into a covenant with thee, says the lord Jehovah, and thou became mine.
Then I washed thee with water. Yea, I thoroughly washed away thy blood from thee, and I anointed thee with oil.
I also clothed thee with embroidered work, and shod thee with a certain skin. And I girded thee around with fine linen, and covered thee with silk.
And I decked thee with ornaments, and I put bracelets upon thy hands, and a chain on thy neck.
And I put a ring upon thy nose, and earrings in thine ears, and a beautiful crown upon thy head.
Thus thou were decked with gold and silver, and thy raiment was of fine linen, and silk, and embroidered work. Thou ate fine flour, and honey, and oil. And thou were very beautiful, and thou prospered to royalty.
And thy renown went forth among the nations for thy beauty. For it was perfect, through my majesty which I had put upon thee, says the lord Jehovah.
But thou trusted in thy beauty, and played the harlot because of thy renown, and poured out thy whoredoms on everyone who passed by; his it was.
And thou took of thy garments, and made high places for thee, decked with various colors, and played the harlot upon them, things which should not come, nor should it be.
Thou also took thy fair jewels of my gold and of my silver, which I had given thee, and made for thee images of men, and played the harlot with them.
And thou took thy embroidered garments, and covered them, and set my oil and my incense before them.
My bread also which I gave thee, fine flour and oil and honey, with which I fed thee, thou even set it before them for a sweet savor, and thus it was, says the lord Jehovah.
Moreover thou have taken thy sons and thy daughters, whom thou have borne to me, and thou have sacrificed these to them to be devoured. Were thy whoredoms a small matter,
that thou have slain my children, and delivered them up, in causing them to pass through the fire to them?
And in all thine abominations and thy whoredoms thou have not remembered the days of thy youth when thou were naked and bare, and were weltering in thy blood.
And it has come to pass according to all thy wickedness, (woe, woe to thee! says the lord Jehovah),
that thou have built thyself a vaulted place, and have made thee a lofty place in every street.
Thou have built thy lofty place at the head of every way, and have made thy beauty an abomination. And have opened thy feet to everyone who passed by, and multiplied thy whoredom.
Thou have also committed fornication with the Egyptians, thy neighbors, great of flesh, and have multiplied thy whoredom, to provoke me to anger.
Behold therefore, I have stretched out my hand over thee, and have diminished thy portion, and delivered thee to the will of those who hate thee, the daughters of the Philistines, who are ashamed of thy lewd way.
Thou have played the harlot also with the Assyrians, because thou were insatiable. Yea, thou have played the harlot with them, and yet thou were not satisfied.
Thou have moreover multiplied thy whoredom to the land of traffic, to Chaldea, and yet thou were not satisfied with this.
How weak is thy heart, says the lord Jehovah, seeing thou do all these things, the work of an impudent harlot,
in that thou build thy vaulted place at the head of every way, and make thy lofty place in every street. And have not even been as a harlot, in that thou scorn hire.
A wife who commits adultery, who takes strangers instead of her husband!
They give gifts to all harlots, but thou give thy gifts to all thy lovers, and bribe them, that they may come to thee on every side for thy whoredoms.
And thou are different from other women in thy whoredoms, in that none follows thee to play the harlot. And whereas thou give a wage, and no wage is given to thee, therefore thou are different.
Therefore, O harlot, hear the word of Jehovah.
Because thy filthiness was poured out, and thy nakedness uncovered through thy whoredoms with thy lovers, and because of all the idols of thy abominations, and for the blood of thy sons, that thou gave to them,
therefore, behold, I will gather all thy lovers, with whom thou have taken pleasure, and all those whom thou have loved, with all those whom thou have hated, I will even gather them against thee on every side. And I will uncover thy nakedness to them, that they may see all thy nakedness.
And I will judge thee, as women who break wedlock and shed blood are judged. And I will bring upon thee the blood of wrath and jealousy.
I will also give thee into their hand, and they shall throw down thy vaulted place, and break down thy lofty places. And they shall strip thee of thy clothes, and take thy fair jewels, and they shall leave thee naked and bare.
They shall also bring up a company against thee, and they shall stone thee with stones, and thrust thee through with their swords.
And they shall burn thy houses with fire, and execute judgments upon thee in the sight of many women. And I will cause thee to cease from playing the harlot, and thou shall also give no wage any more.
So I will cause my wrath toward thee to rest, and my jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will no more be angry.
Because thou have not remembered the days of thy youth, but have raged against me in all these things, therefore, behold, I also will bring thy way upon thy head, says the lord Jehovah. And thou shall not commit this lewdness with all thine abominations.
Behold, everyone who uses proverbs shall use this proverb against thee, saying, As is the mother, so is her daughter.
Thou are the daughter of thy mother, who loathes her husband and her sons. And thou are the sister of thy sisters, who loathed their husbands and their sons. Your mother was a Hittite, and your father an Amorite.
And thine elder sister is Samaria, who dwells at thy left hand, she and her daughters. And thy younger sister, who dwells at thy right hand, is Sodom and her daughters.
Yet thou have not walked in their ways, nor done according to their abominations, but, like it was a very little thing, thou were more corrupt than they in all thy ways.
As I live, says the lord Jehovah, Sodom thy sister has not done, she nor her daughters, as thou have done, thou and thy daughters.
pride, fullness of bread, and prosperous ease was in her and in her daughters, and she did not strengthen the hand of a poor and needy man.
And they were haughty, and committed abomination before me. Therefore I took them away as I saw fit.
Neither has Samaria committed half of thy sins, but thou have multiplied thine abominations more than they, and have justified thy sisters by all thine abominations which thou have done.
Thou also, bear thou thine own shame, in that thou have given judgment for thy sisters, through thy sins that thou have committed more abominable than they. They are more righteous than thou. Yea, be thou also confounded, and bear thy shame, in that thou have justified thy sisters.
And I will turn back again their captivity, the captivity of Sodom and her daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, and the captivity of thy captives in the midst of them,
that thou may bear thine own shame, and may be ashamed because of all that thou have done, in that thou are a comfort to them.
And thy sisters, Sodom and her daughters, shall return to their former estate, and Samaria and her daughters shall return to their former estate, and thou and thy daughters shall return to your former estate.
For thy sister Sodom was not mentioned by thy mouth in the day of thy pride,
before thy wickedness was uncovered, as at the time of the reproach of the daughters of Syria, and of all who are round about her, the daughters of the Philistines, who do despite to thee round about.
Thou have borne thy lewdness and thine abominations, says Jehovah.
I will also deal with thee as thou have done, who have despised the oath in breaking the covenant.
Nevertheless I will remember my covenant with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish to thee an everlasting covenant.
Then thou shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shall receive thy sisters, thine elder sisters and thy younger, and I will give them to thee for daughters, but not by thy covenant.
And I will establish my covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am Jehovah,
that thou may remember, and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I have forgiven thee all that thou have done, says the lord Jehovah.

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, put forth a riddle, and speak a parable to the house of Israel,
A great eagle with great wings and long pinions, full of feathers, which had various colors, came to Lebanon, and took the top of the cedar.
He cropped off the topmost of the young twigs of it, and carried it to a land of merchandise. He set it in a city of merchants.
He took also of the seed of the land, and planted it in a fruitful soil. He placed it beside many waters. He set it as a willow tree.
And it grew, and became a spreading vine of low stature, whose branches turned toward him, and the roots of it were under him. So it became a vine, and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs.
There was also another great eagle with great wings and many feathers. And, behold, this vine bent its roots toward him, and shot forth its branches toward him, from the beds of its plantation, that he might water it.
It was planted in a good soil by many waters that it might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit that it might be a goodly vine.
Shall it flourish? Shall he not pull up the roots of it, and cut off the fruit of it, that it may wither? It shall wither in all its fresh springing leaves, even without great power or many people to pluck it up by the roots of it.
Yea, behold, being planted, shall it flourish? Shall it not utterly wither when the east wind touches it? It shall wither in the beds where it grew.
Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Say now to the rebellious house, Know ye not what these things mean? Tell them, Behold, the king of Babylon came to Jerusalem, and took the king of it, and the rulers of it, and brought them to him to Babylon.
And he took of the seed royal, and made a covenant with him. He also brought him under an oath, and took away the mighty of the land,
that the kingdom might be base, that it might not lift itself up, but that by keeping his covenant it might stand.
But he rebelled against him in sending his ambassadors into Egypt that they might give him horses and many people. Shall he prosper? Shall he escape who does such things? Shall he break the covenant, and yet escape?
As I live, says the lord Jehovah, surely in the place where the king dwells who made him king, whose oath he despised, and whose covenant he broke, even with him in the midst of Babylon he shall die.
Nor shall Pharaoh with his mighty army and great company help him in the war when they cast up mounds and build forts to cut off many persons.
For he has despised the oath by breaking the covenant. And, behold, he had given his hand, and yet has done all these things. He shall not escape.
As I live, surely my oath that he has despised, and my covenant that he has broken, I will even bring it upon his own head.
And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my snare. And I will bring him to Babylon, and will enter into judgment with him there for his trespass that he has trespassed against me.
And all his fugitives in all his groups shall fall by the sword, and those who remain shall be scattered toward every wind. And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
I will also take of the lofty top of the cedar, and will set it. I will crop off a tender one from the topmost of its young twigs, and I will plant it upon a high and lofty mountain.
I will plant it in the mountain of the height of Israel, and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar. And all birds of every wing shall dwell under it; they shall dwell in the shade of the branches thereof.
And all the trees of the field shall know that I, Jehovah, have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to flourish. I, Jehovah, have spoken and have done it.

The word of Jehovah came to me again, saying,
What do ye mean, that ye use this proverb concerning the land of Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the son's teeth are set on edge?
As I live, says the lord Jehovah, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in Israel.
Behold, all souls are mine, as the soul of the father, so also the soul of the son is mine. The soul that sins, it shall die.
But if a man be just, and does that which is lawful and right,
and has not eaten upon the mountains, nor has lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, nor has defiled his neighbor's wife, nor has come near to a woman in her impurity,
and has not wronged any man, but has restored to the debtor his pledge, has taken nothing by robbery, has given his bread to a hungry man, and has covered a naked man with a garment,
he who has not given forth upon interest, nor has taken any increase, who has withdrawn his hand from iniquity, has executed true justice between man and man,
has walked in my statutes, and has kept my ordinances, to deal truly, he is just. He shall surely live, says the lord Jehovah.
If he begets a son who is a robber, a shedder of blood, and who does any one of these things,
and who does not do any of those duties, but has even eaten upon the mountains, and defiled his neighbor's wife,
has wronged the poor and needy man, has taken by robbery, has not restored the pledge, and has lifted up his eyes to the idols, has committed abomination,
has given forth upon interest, and has taken increase, shall he then live? He shall not live. He has done all these abominations. He shall surely die. His blood shall be upon him.
Now, lo, if he begets a son, who sees all his father's sins, which he has done, and fears, and does not do such like,
who has not eaten upon the mountains, nor has lifted up his eyes to the idols of the house of Israel, has not defiled his neighbor's wife,
nor has wronged any man, has not taken anything to pledge, nor has taken by robbery, but has given his bread to a hungry man, and has covered a naked man with a garment,
who has withdrawn his hand from a poor man, who has not received interest nor increase, has executed my ordinances, has walked in my statutes, he shall not die for the iniquity of his father. He shall surely live.
As for his father, because he cruelly oppressed, robbed his brother, and did that which is not good among his people, behold, he shall die in his iniquity.
Yet ye say, Why does not the son bear the iniquity of the father? When the son has done that which is lawful and right, and has kept all my statutes, and has done them, he shall surely live.
The soul that sins, it shall die. The son shall not bear the iniquity of the father, nor shall the father bear the iniquity of the son. The righteousness of a righteous man shall be upon him, and the wickedness of a wicked man shall be upon him.
But if a wicked man turns from all his sins that he has committed, and keeps all my statutes, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live. He shall not die.
None of his transgressions that he has committed shall be remembered against him. In his righteousness that he has done he shall live.
Have I any pleasure in the death of a wicked man? says the lord Jehovah, and not rather that he should return from his way, and live?
But when a righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and does according to all the abominations that a wicked man does, shall he live? None of his righteous deeds that he has done shall be remembered. In his trespass that he has trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them he shall die.
Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equitable. Hear now, O house of Israel. Is not my way equitable? Are not your ways inequitable?
When a righteous man turns away from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, and dies in it, in his iniquity that he has done, he shall die.
Again, when a wicked man turns away from his wickedness that he has committed, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall save his soul alive.
Because he considers, and turns away from all his transgressions that he has committed, he shall surely live. He shall not die.
Yet the house of Israel says, The way of the Lord is not equitable. O house of Israel, are not my ways equitable? Are not your ways inequitable?
Therefore I will judge you, O house of Israel, each one according to his ways, says the lord Jehovah. Return ye, and turn yourselves from all your transgressions, so iniquity shall not be your ruin.
Cast away from you all your transgressions, by which ye have transgressed, and make you a new heart and a new spirit. For why will ye die, O house of Israel?
For I have no pleasure in the death of him who dies, says the lord Jehovah, therefore turn yourselves back, and live.

Moreover, take thou up a lamentation for the rulers of Israel,
and say, What was thy mother? A lioness. She couched among lions. In the midst of the young lions she nourished her whelps.
And she brought up one of her whelps. He became a young lion, and he learned to catch the prey. He devoured men.
The nations also heard of him. He was taken in their pit, and they brought him with hooks to the land of Egypt.
Now when she saw that she had waited, and her hope was lost, then she took another of her whelps, and made him a young lion.
And he went up and down among the lions. He became a young lion, and he learned to catch the prey. He devoured men.
And he knew their palaces, and laid waste their cities. And the land was desolate, and the fullness of it, because of the noise of his roaring.
Then the nations set against him on every side from the provinces, and they spread their net over him. He was taken in their pit.
And they put him in a cage with hooks, and brought him to the king of Babylon. They brought him into strongholds, that his voice should no more be heard upon the mountains of Israel.
Thy mother was like a vine in thy blood, planted by the waters. It was fruitful and full of branches because of many waters.
And it had strong twigs for the scepters of those who bore rule. And their stature was exalted among the thick boughs, and they were seen in their height with the multitude of their branches.
But it was plucked up in fury. It was cast down to the ground, and the east wind dried up its fruit. Its strong twigs were broken off and withered. The fire consumed them.
And now it is planted in the wilderness, in a dry and thirsty land.
And fire has gone out of the twigs of its branches. It has devoured its fruit, so that there is no strong twig in it to be a scepter to rule. This is a lamentation, and shall be for a lamentation.

And it came to pass in the seventh year, in the fifth month, the tenth day of the month, that certain of the elders of Israel came to inquire of Jehovah, and sat before me.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Is it to inquire of me that ye have come? As I live, says the lord Jehovah, I will not be inquired of by you.
Will thou judge them, son of man, will thou judge them? Cause them to know the abominations of their fathers,
In the day when I chose Israel, and swore to the seed of the house of Jacob, and made myself known to them in the land of Egypt, when I swore to them, saying, I am Jehovah your God,
I swore to them in that day, to bring them forth out of the land of Egypt into a land that I had searched out for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands.
And I said to them, Cast ye away every man the abominations of his eyes, and do not defile yourselves with the idols of Egypt. I am Jehovah your God.
But they rebelled against me, and would not hearken to me. They did not every man cast away the abominations of their eyes, nor did they forsake the idols of Egypt. Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the midst of the land of Egypt.
But I worked for my name's sake (that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, among which they were, in whose sight I made myself known to them) in bringing them forth out of the land of Egypt.
So I caused them to go forth out of the land of Egypt, and brought them into the wilderness.
And I gave them my statutes, and showed them my ordinances, which if a man does, he shall live in them.
Moreover I also gave them my sabbaths, to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am Jehovah who sanctifies them.
But the house of Israel rebelled against me in the wilderness. They did not walk in my statutes, and they rejected my ordinances, which if a man keeps, he shall live in them. And they greatly profaned my sabbaths. Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them in the wilderness, to consume them.
But I worked for my name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in whose sight I brought them out.
Moreover also I swore to them in the wilderness, that I would not bring them into the land which I had given them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the glory of all lands,
because they rejected my ordinances, and did not walk in my statutes, and profaned my sabbaths, for their heart went after their idols.
Nevertheless my eye spared them, and I did not destroy them, nor did I make a full end of them in the wilderness.
And I said to their sons in the wilderness, Walk ye not in the statutes of your fathers. Neither observe their ordinances, nor defile yourselves with their idols.
I am Jehovah your God. Walk in my statutes, and keep my ordinances, and do them,
and hallow my sabbaths, and they shall be a sign between me and you, that ye may know that I am Jehovah your God.
But the sons rebelled against me. They did not walk in my statutes, nor kept my ordinances to do them, which if a man does, he shall live in them. They profaned my sabbaths. Then I said I would pour out my wrath upon them, to accomplish my anger against them in the wilderness.
Nevertheless I withdrew my hand, and worked for my name's sake, that it should not be profaned in the sight of the nations, in whose sight I brought them forth.
Moreover I swore to them in the wilderness, that I would scatter them among the nations, and disperse them through the countries,
because they had not executed my ordinances, but had rejected my statutes, and had profaned my sabbaths, and their eyes were after their fathers' idols.
Moreover I also gave them statutes that were not good, and ordinances in which they will not live.
And I polluted them in their own gifts, in that they caused to pass through the fire all that opens the womb, that I might make them desolate, to the end that they might know that I am Jehovah.
In this moreover your fathers have blasphemed me, in that they have committed a trespass against me.
For when I had brought them into the land, which I swore to give to them, then they saw every high hill, and every thick tree, and they offered there their sacrifices, and there they presented the provocation of their offering. There also they made their sweet savor, and they poured out there their drink offerings.
Then I said to them, What does the high place to which ye go mean? So the name of it is called Bamah to this day.
Do ye pollute yourselves according to the manner of your fathers, and play ye the harlot according to their abominations?
And when ye offer your gifts, when ye make your sons to pass through the fire, do ye pollute yourselves with all your idols to this day? And shall I be inquired of by you, O house of Israel? As I live, says the lord Jehovah, I will not be inquired of by you.
And that which comes into your mind shall not be at all, in that ye say, We will be as the nations, as the families of the countries, to serve wood and stone.
As I live, says the lord Jehovah, surely with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with wrath poured out, I will be king over you.
And I will bring you out from the peoples, and will gather you out of the countries in which ye are scattered, with a mighty hand, and with an outstretched arm, and with wrath poured out,
and I will bring you into the wilderness of the peoples. And there I will enter into judgment with you face to face.
Just as I entered into judgment with your fathers in the wilderness of the land of Egypt, so I will enter into judgment with you, says the lord Jehovah.
And I will cause you to pass under the rod. And I will bring you into the bond of the covenant.
And I will purge out from among you the rebels, and those who transgress against me. I will bring them forth out of the land where they sojourn, but they shall not enter into the land of Israel. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Go ye. Serve each one his idols, and hereafter also, if ye will not hearken to me. But ye shall no more profane my holy name with your gifts, and with your idols.
For in my holy mountain, in the mountain of the height of Israel, says the lord Jehovah, there shall all the house of Israel, all of them, serve me in the land. There I will accept them, and there I will require your offerings, and the first-fruits of your oblations, with all your holy things.
I will accept you as a sweet savor when I bring you out from the peoples, and gather you out of the countries in which ye have been scattered. And I will be sanctified in you in the sight of the nations.
And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when I shall bring you into the land of Israel, into the country which I swore to give to your fathers.
And there ye shall remember your ways, and all your doings, by which ye have polluted yourselves. And ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for all your evils that ye have committed.
And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when I have dealt with you for my name's sake, not according to your evil ways, nor according to your corrupt doings, O ye house of Israel, says the lord Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, set thy face toward the south, and drop thy word toward the south, and prophesy against the forest of the field in the South.
Behold, I will kindle a fire in thee, and it shall devour every green tree in thee, and every dry tree. The flaming flame shall not be quenched, and all faces from the south to the north shall be burnt by it.
And all flesh shall see that I, Jehovah, have kindled it. It shall not be quenched.
Then I said, Ah lord Jehovah! They say of me, Is he not a speaker of parables?

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, set thy face toward Jerusalem, and drop thy word toward the sanctuaries, and prophesy against the land of Israel.
Behold, I am against thee. And will draw forth my sword out of its sheath, and will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked.
Seeing then that I will cut off from thee the righteous and the wicked, therefore my sword shall go forth out of its sheath against all flesh from the south to the north.
And all flesh shall know that I, Jehovah, have drawn forth my sword out of its sheath. It shall not return any more.
Sigh therefore, thou son of man. With the breaking of thy loins and with bitterness thou shall sigh before their eyes.
And it shall be, when they say to thee, Why do thou sigh? That thou shall say, Because of the news. For it comes, and every heart shall melt, and all hands shall be feeble, and every spirit shall faint, and all knees shall be weak as water. Behold, it comes, and it shall be done, says the lord Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Say, A sword, a sword. It is sharpened, and also furbished.
It is sharpened that it may make a slaughter. It is polished that it may be as lightning. Shall we then make mirth? It scorns the scepter of my son, every tree.
And it is given to be polished, that it may be handled. The sword, it is sharpened, yea, it is polished, to give it into the hand of the slayer.
Cry and wail, son of man, for it is upon my people. It is upon all the rulers of Israel. They are delivered over to the sword with my people. Smite therefore upon thy thigh.
For there is a trial, and what if even the rod that scorns shall be no more? says the lord Jehovah.
Thou therefore, son of man, prophesy, and smite thy hands together. And let the sword be doubled the third time, the sword of the deadly wounded. It is the sword of the great man who is deadly wounded, which enters into their chambers.
I have set the threatening sword against all their gates, that their heart may melt, and their stumblings be multiplied. Ah! It is made as lightning. It is pointed for slaughter.
Gather thee together. Go to the right. Set thyself in array. Go to the left, wherever thy face is set.
I will also smite my hands together, and I will cause my wrath to rest. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
The word of Jehovah came to me again, saying,
Also, thou son of man, appoint thee two ways that the sword of the king of Babylon may come. Those two shall come forth out of one land. And mark out a place. Mark it out at the head of the way to the city.
Thou shall appoint a way for the sword to come to Rabbah of the sons of Ammon, and to Judah in Jerusalem the fortified.
For the king of Babylon stood at the parting of the way, at the head of the two ways, to use divination. He shook the arrows to and fro. He consulted the teraphim. He looked in the liver.
In his right hand was the divination for Jerusalem, to set battering rams, to open the mouth in the slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to set battering rams against the gates, to cast up mounds, to build forts.
And it shall be to them as a false divination in their sight, who have sworn oaths to them. But he brings iniquity to remembrance, that they may be taken.
Because ye have made your iniquity to be remembered, in that your transgressions are uncovered, so that in all your doings your sins do appear, because ye have come to remembrance, ye shall be taken with the hand.
And thou, O deadly wounded wicked man, the ruler of Israel, whose day has come, in the time of the iniquity of the end,
Remove the miter, and take off the crown. This shall be no more the same. Exalt that which is low, and abase that which is high.
I will overturn, overturn, overturn it. This also shall be no more, until he comes whose right it is. And I will give it.
And thou, son of man, prophesy, and say, Thus says the lord Jehovah concerning the sons of Ammon, and concerning their reproach. And say thou, A sword, a sword is drawn. It is polished for the slaughter, to cause it to devour, that it may be as lightning,
while they see for thee false visions, while they divine lies to thee, to lay thee upon the necks of the wicked who are deadly wounded, whose day has come in the time of the iniquity of the end.
Cause it to return into its sheath. In the place where thou were created, in the land of thy birth, I will judge thee.
And I will pour out my indignation upon thee. I will blow upon thee with the fire of my wrath, and I will deliver thee into the hand of brutish men, skilful to destroy.
Thou shall be for fuel to the fire. Thy blood shall be in the midst of the land. Thou shall no more be remembered. For I, Jehovah, have spoken it.

Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
And thou, son of man, will thou judge, will thou judge the bloody city? Then cause her to know all her abominations.
A city that sheds blood in the midst of her, that her time may come, and who makes idols against herself to defile her!
Thou have become guilty in thy blood that thou have shed, and are defiled in thine idols which thou have made. And thou have caused thy days to draw near, and have come even to thy years. Therefore I have made thee a reproach to the nations, and a mocking to all the countries.
Those that are near, and those that are far from thee, shall mock thee, thou infamous one, full of tumult.
Behold, the rulers of Israel, each one according to his power, have been in thee to shed blood.
In thee they have made light of father and mother. In the midst of thee they have dealt with the sojourner by oppression. In thee they have wronged the fatherless and the widow.
Thou have despised my holy things, and have profaned my sabbaths.
Slanderous men have been in thee to shed blood, and in thee they have eaten upon the mountains. In the midst of thee they have committed lewdness.
In thee they have uncovered their fathers' nakedness. In thee they have humbled her who was unclean in her impurity.
And one has committed abomination with his neighbor's wife, and another has lewdly defiled his daughter-in-law, and another in thee has humbled his sister, his father's daughter.
In thee they have taken bribes to shed blood. Thou have taken interest and increase. And thou have greedily gained from thy neighbors by oppression, and have forgotten me, says the lord Jehovah.
Behold, therefore, I have smitten my hand at thy dishonest gain which thou have made, and at thy blood which has been in the midst of thee.
Can thy heart endure, or can thy hands be strong, in the days that I shall deal with thee? I, Jehovah, have spoken it, and will do it.
And I will scatter thee among the nations, and disperse thee through the countries, and I will consume thy filthiness out of thee.
And thou shall be profaned in thyself, in the sight of the nations. And thou shall know that I am Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, the house of Israel has become dross to me. All of them are brass, and tin, and iron, and lead, in the midst of the furnace. They are the dross of silver.
Because ye have all become dross, therefore, behold, I will gather you into the midst of Jerusalem
as they gather silver and brass and iron and lead and tin into the midst of the furnace, to blow the fire upon it, to melt it. So I will gather you in my anger and in my wrath, and I will lay you there, and melt you.
Yea, I will gather you, and blow upon you with the fire of my wrath, and ye shall be melted in the midst of it.
As silver is melted in the midst of the furnace, so ye shall be melted in the midst of it. And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, have poured out my wrath upon you.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, say to her, Thou are a land that is not cleansed, nor rained upon in the day of indignation.
There is a conspiracy by her prophets in the midst of it, like a roaring lion ravening the prey. They have devoured souls. They take treasure and precious things. They have made her widows many in the midst thereof.
Her priests have done violence to my law, and have profaned my holy things. They have made no distinction between the holy and the common, nor have they caused men to discern between the unclean and the clean, and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths, and I am profaned among them.
Her rulers in the midst of it are like wolves ravening the prey, to shed blood, to destroy souls, that they may get dishonest gain.
And her prophets have daubed for them with untempered mortar, seeing false visions, and divining lies to them, saying, Thus says the lord Jehovah, when Jehovah has not spoken.
The people of the land have used oppression, and exercised robbery. Yea, they have vexed the poor and needy man, and have oppressed the sojourner wrongfully.
And I sought for a man among them who should build up the wall, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I should not destroy it, but I found none.
Therefore I have poured out my indignation upon them. I have consumed them with the fire of my wrath. I have brought their own way upon their heads, says the lord Jehovah.

The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
Son of man, there were two women, the daughters of one mother.
And they played the harlot in Egypt. They played the harlot in their youth. There their breasts were pressed, and there was handled the bosom of their virginity.
And the names of them were Oholah the elder, and Oholibah her sister. And they became mine, and they bore sons and daughters. And as for their names, Samaria is Oholah, and Jerusalem Oholibah.
And Oholah played the harlot when she was mine, and she doted on her lovers, on the Assyrians her neighbors,
who were clothed with blue, governors and rulers, all of them desirable young men, horsemen riding upon horses.
And she bestowed her whoredoms upon them, the choicest men of Assyria all of them. And on whomever she doted, with all their idols she defiled herself.
Neither has she left her whoredoms since Egypt. For in her youth they lie with her, and they handled the bosom of her virginity, and they poured out their whoredom upon her.
Therefore I delivered her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians, upon whom she doted.
These uncovered her nakedness. They took her sons and her daughters, and they killed her with the sword. And she became a byword among women, for they executed judgments upon her.
And her sister Oholibah saw this, yet she was more corrupt in her doting than she, and in her whoredoms which were more than the whoredoms of her sister.
She doted upon the Assyrians, governors and rulers, her neighbors, clothed most gorgeously, horsemen riding upon horses, all of them desirable young men.
And I saw that she was defiled. They both took one way.
And she increased her whoredoms, for she saw men portrayed upon the wall, the images of the Chaldeans portrayed with vermilion,
girded with belts upon their loins, with flowing turbans upon their heads, all of them rulers to look upon, according to the likeness of the Babylonians in Chaldea, the land of their nativity.
And as soon as she saw them she doted upon them, and sent messengers to them into Chaldea.
And the Babylonians came to her into the bed of love. And they defiled her with their whoredom, and she was polluted with them, and her soul was alienated from them.
So she uncovered her whoredoms, and uncovered her nakedness. Then my soul was alienated from her, just as my soul was alienated from her sister.
Yet she multiplied her whoredoms, remembering the days of her youth in which she had played the harlot in the land of Egypt.
And she doted upon their paramours, whose flesh is as the flesh of donkeys, and whose issue is like the issue of horses.
Thus thou called to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth, in the handling of thy bosom by the Egyptians for the breasts of thy youth.
the Babylonians and all the Chaldeans, Pekod and Shoa and Koa, and all the Assyrians with them, desirable young men, governors and rulers all of them, rulers and men of renown, all of them riding upon horses.
And they shall come against thee with weapons, chariots, and wagons, and with a company of peoples. They shall set themselves against thee with buckler and shield and helmet round about. And I will commit the judgment to them, and they shall judge thee according to their judgments.
And I will set my jealousy against thee, and they shall deal with thee in fury. They shall take away thy nose and thine ears, and thy residue shall fall by the sword. They shall take thy sons and thy daughters, and thy residue shall be devoured by the fire.
They shall also strip thee of thy clothes, and take away thy fair jewels.
Thus I will make thy lewdness to cease from thee, and thy whoredom from the land of Egypt, so that thou shall not lift up thine eyes to them, nor remember Egypt any more.
Behold, I will deliver thee into the hand of those whom thou hate, into the hand of those from whom thy soul is alienated.
And they shall deal with thee in hatred, and shall take away all thy labor, and shall leave thee naked and bare. And the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be uncovered, both thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.
These things shall be done to thee, because thou have played the harlot after the nations, and because thou are polluted with their idols.
Thou have walked in the way of thy sister, therefore I will give her cup into thy hand.
Thou shall drink of thy sister's cup, which is deep and large. Thou shall be laughed to scorn and had in derision. It contains much.
Thou shall be filled with drunkenness and sorrow, with the cup of astonishment and desolation, with the cup of thy sister Samaria.
Thou shall even drink it and drain it out. And thou shall gnaw the shards of it, and shall tear thy breasts, for I have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah.
Because thou have forgotten me, and cast me behind thy back, therefore thou also bear thy lewdness and thy whoredoms.
Jehovah said moreover to me, Son of man, will thou judge Oholah and Oholibah? Then declare to them their abominations.
For they have committed adultery, and blood is in their hands. And with their idols they have committed adultery. And they have also caused their sons, whom they bore to me, to pass through the fire for them to be devoured.
They have defiled my sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my sabbaths.
For when they had slain their sons to their idols, then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it, and, lo, thus they have done in the midst of my house.
And furthermore ye have sent for men who come from far, to whom a messenger was sent. And, lo, they came, for whom thou washed thyself, painted thine eyes, and decked thyself with ornaments,
and sat upon a stately bed, with a table prepared before it, whereupon thou did set my incense and my oil.
And the voice of a multitude being at ease was with her. And with men of the common sort, were brought drunkards from the wilderness, and they put bracelets upon the hands of those two women, and beautiful crowns upon their heads.
Then I said of her who was old in adulteries, Now they will play the harlot with her, and she with them.
And they went in to her, as they go in to a harlot. So they went in to Oholah and to Oholibah, the lewd women.
And righteous men, they shall judge them with the judgment of adulteresses, and with the judgment of women who shed blood, because they are adulteresses, and blood is on their hands.
I will bring up a company against them, and will give them to be tossed to and fro and robbed.
And the company shall stone them with stones, and dispatch them with their swords. They shall kill their sons and their daughters, and burn up their houses with fire.
Thus I will cause lewdness to cease out of the land, that all women may be taught not to do according to your lewdness.
And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols. And ye shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.

Again, in the ninth year, in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, write thee the name of the day, even of this selfsame day; the king of Babylon drew close to Jerusalem this selfsame day.
Set on the caldron. Set it on, and also pour water into it.
Gather the pieces of it into it, even every good piece, the thigh, and the shoulder; fill it with the choice bones.
Take the choice of the flock, and also a pile of wood for the bones under the caldron. Make it boil well, yea, let the bones of it be boiled in the midst of it.
Woe to the bloody city, to the caldron whose rust is therein, and whose rust has not gone out of it! Take out of it piece after piece. No lot has fallen upon it.
For her blood is in the midst of her. She set it upon the bare rock. She did not pour it upon the ground to cover it with dust.
That it may cause wrath to come up to take vengeance, I have set her blood upon the bare rock, that it should not be covered.
Woe to the bloody city! I also will make the pile great.
Heap on the wood; make the fire hot. Boil the flesh well, and make the broth thick. And let the bones be burned.
Then set it empty upon the coals of it, that it may be hot, and the brass of it may burn, and that the filthiness of it may be molten in it, that the scum of it may be consumed.
She has wearied herself with toil, yet her great scum does not go forth out of her, her scum by fire.
In thy filthiness is lewdness. Because I have cleansed thee and thou were not cleansed, thou shall not be cleansed from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my wrath toward thee to rest.
I, Jehovah, have spoken it. It shall come to pass, and I will do it. I will not go back. I will neither spare, nor will I relent. According to thy ways, and according to thy doings, they shall judge thee, says the lord Jehovah.
Also the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, behold, I take the desire of thine eyes away from thee with a stroke. Yet thou shall neither mourn nor weep. Neither shall thy tears run down.
Sigh, but not aloud. Make no mourning for the dead. Bind thy headdress upon thee, and put thy shoes upon thy feet. And do not cover thy lips, and do not eat the bread of men.
So I spoke to the people in the morning, and at evening my wife died. And I did in the morning as I was commanded.
And the people said to me, Will thou not tell us what these things are to us, that thou do so?
Then I said to them, The word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Behold, I will profane my sanctuary, the pride of your power, the desire of your eyes, and that which your soul has compassion. And your sons and your daughters whom ye have left behind shall fall by the sword.
And ye shall do as I have done. Ye shall not cover your lips, nor eat the bread of men.
And your coverings shall be upon your heads, and your shoes upon your feet. Ye shall not mourn nor weep, but ye shall pine away in your iniquities, and moan one toward another.
Thus Ezekiel shall be to you a sign, according to all that he has done ye shall do. When this comes, then ye shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.
And thou, son of man, shall it not be in the day when I take from them their strength, the joy of their glory, the desire of their eyes, and that upon which they set their heart-their sons and their daughters-
that in that day he who escapes shall come to thee, to cause thee to hear it with thine ears?
In that day thy mouth shall be opened to him who is escaped, and thou shall speak, and no more be mute. So thou shall be a sign to them, and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, set thy face toward the sons of Ammon, and prophesy against them.
Because thou said, Aha, against my sanctuary when it was profaned, and against the land of Israel when it was made desolate, and against the house of Judah when they went into captivity,
therefore, behold, I will deliver thee to the sons of the east for a possession, and they shall set their encampments in thee, and make their dwellings in thee. They shall eat thy fruit, and they shall drink thy milk.
And I will make Rabbah a stable for camels, and the sons of Ammon a couching-place for flocks. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Because thou have clapped thy hands, and stamped with the feet, and rejoiced with all the spite of thy soul against the land of Israel,
therefore, behold, I have stretched out my hand upon thee, and will deliver thee for a spoil to the nations. And I will cut thee off from the peoples, and I will cause thee to perish out of the countries. I will destroy thee, and thou shall know that I am Jehovah.
Because Moab and Seir say, Behold, the house of Judah is like all the nations,
therefore, behold, I will open the side of Moab from the cities, from his cities which are on his frontiers, the glory of the country-Beth-jeshimoth, Baal-meon, and Kiriathaim-
open to the sons of the east, against the sons of Ammon. And I will give them for a possession, that the sons of Ammon may not be remembered among the nations.
And I will execute judgments upon Moab, and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Because Edom has dealt against the house of Judah by taking vengeance, and has greatly offended, and revenged himself upon them,
I will stretch out my hand upon Edom, and will cut off man and beast from it, and I will make it desolate. From Teman, even to Dedan they shall fall by the sword.
And I will lay my vengeance upon Edom by the hand of my people Israel, and they shall do in Edom according to my anger and according to my wrath. And they shall know my vengeance, says the lord Jehovah.
Because the Philistines have dealt by revenge, and have taken vengeance with spite of soul to destroy with perpetual enmity,
Behold, I will stretch out my hand upon the Philistines, and I will cut off the Cherethites, and destroy the remnant of the sea coast.
And I will execute great vengeance upon them with wrathful rebukes. And they shall know that I am Jehovah when I shall lay my vengeance upon them.

And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, because Tyre has said against Jerusalem, Aha, she is broken, the gate of the peoples. She has turned around to me. I shall be replenished, now that she is laid waste,
Behold, I am against thee, O Tyre, and will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causes its waves to come up.
And they shall destroy the walls of Tyre, and break down her towers. I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her a bare rock.
She shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea, for I have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah. And she shall become a spoil to the nations,
and her daughters who are in the field shall be slain with the sword. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
Behold, I will bring upon Tyre, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, king of kings, from the north, with horses, and with chariots, and with horsemen, and a company, and many people.
He shall kill thy daughters in the field with the sword. And he shall make forts against thee, and cast up a mound against thee, and raise up the buckler against thee.
And he shall set his battering engines against thy walls, and with his axes he shall break down thy towers.
Because of the abundance of his horses their dust shall cover thee. Thy walls shall shake at the noise of the horsemen, and of the wagons, and of the chariots, when he shall enter into thy gates, as men enter into a city in which a breach is made.
With the hoofs of his horses he shall tread down all thy streets. He shall kill thy people with the sword, and the pillars of thy strength shall go down to the ground.
And they shall make a spoil of thy riches, and make a prey of thy merchandise. And they shall break down thy walls, and destroy thy pleasant houses, and they shall lay thy stones and thy timber and thy dust in the midst of the waters.
And I will cause the noise of thy songs to cease, and the sound of thy harps shall no more be heard.
And I will make thee a bare rock; thou shall be a place for the spreading of nets. Thou shall be built no more, for I Jehovah have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah.
Shall not the isles shake at the sound of thy fall, when the wounded groan, when the slaughter is made in the midst of thee?
Then all the rulers of the sea shall come down from their thrones, and lie aside their robes, and strip off their broidered garments. They shall clothe themselves with trembling. They shall sit upon the ground, and shall tremble every moment, and be astonished at thee.
And they shall take up a lamentation over thee, and say to thee, How thou are destroyed, who were inhabited by seafaring men, the renowned city that was strong in the sea, she and her inhabitants, who caused their terror to be on all who dwelt there!
Now the isles shall tremble in the day of thy fall. Yea, the isles that are in the sea shall be dismayed at thy departure.
When I shall make thee a desolate city, like the cities that are not inhabited, when I shall bring up the deep upon thee, and the great waters shall cover thee,
then I will bring thee down with those who descend into the pit, to the people of old time, and will make thee to dwell in the nether parts of the earth, in the places that are desolate of old, with those who go down to the pit, that thou not be inhabited. And I will set glory in the land of the living.
I will make thee a horror, and thou shall no more have any being. Though thou be sought for, yet thou shall never be found again, says the lord Jehovah.

The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
And thou, son of man, take up a lamentation over Tyre,
Thou, O Tyre, have said, I am perfect in beauty.
Thy borders are in the heart of the seas. Thy builders have perfected thy beauty.
They have made all thy planks of fir trees from Senir. They have taken a cedar from Lebanon to make a mast for thee.
Of the oaks of Bashan they have made thine oars. They have made thy benches of ivory inlaid in boxwood, from the isles of Kittim.
Of fine linen with broidered work from Egypt was thy sail, that it might be to thee for an ensign. Blue and purple from the isles of Elishah was thine awning.
The inhabitants of Sidon and Arvad were thy rowers. Thy wise men, O Tyre, were in thee; they were thy pilots.
The old men of Gebal and the wise men thereof were thy caulkers in thee. All the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to deal in thy merchandise.
Persia and Lud and Put were in thine army, thy men of war. They hung the shield and helmet in thee. They set forth thy comeliness.
The men of Arvad with thine army were upon thy walls round about, and valorous men were in thy towers. They hung their shields upon thy walls round about. They have perfected thy beauty.
Tarshish was thy merchant because of the multitude of all kinds of riches, with silver, iron, tin, and lead. They traded for thy wares.
Javan, Tubal, and Meshech, they were thy merchants. They traded the persons of men, and vessels of brass for thy merchandise.
Those of the house of Togarmah traded for thy wares with horses and war-horses and mules.
The men of Dedan were thy merchants. Many isles were the mart of thy hand. They brought thee in exchange horns of ivory and ebony.
Syria was thy merchant because of the multitude of thy handiworks. They traded for thy wares with emeralds, purple, and embroidered work, and fine linen, and coral, and rubies.
Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants. They traded for thy merchandise wheat of Minnith, and pannag, and honey, and oil, and balm.
Damascus was thy merchant for the multitude of thy handiworks, because of the multitude of all kinds of riches, with the wine of Helbon, and white wool.
Vedan and Javan traded with yarn for thy wares. Bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were among thy merchandise.
Dedan was thy merchant in precious cloths for riding.
Arabia, and all the rulers of Kedar, they were the merchants of thy hand, in lambs, and rams, and goats. In these they were thy merchants.
The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy merchants. They traded for thy wares with the chief of all spices, and with all precious stones, and gold.
Haran and Canneh and Eden, the merchants of Sheba, Asshur and Chilmad, were thy merchants.
These were thy merchants in choice wares, in wrappings of blue and embroidered work, and in chests of rich apparel, bound with cords and made of cedar, among thy merchandise.
The ships of Tarshish were thy caravans for thy merchandise. And thou were replenished, and made very glorious in the heart of the seas.
Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters. The east wind has broken thee in the heart of the seas.
Thy riches, and thy wares, thy merchandise, thy mariners, and thy pilots, thy caulkers, and the dealers in thy merchandise, and all thy men of war, who are in thee, with all thy company which is in the midst of thee, shall fall into the heart of the seas in the day of thy ruin.
At the sound of the cry of thy pilots the suburbs shall shake.
And all who handled the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the sea, shall come down from their ships. They shall stand upon the land,
and shall cause their voice to be heard over thee, and shall cry bitterly, and shall cast up dust upon their heads. They shall wallow themselves in the ashes.
And they shall make themselves bald for thee, and gird with sackcloth, and they shall weep for thee in bitterness of soul with bitter mourning.
And in their wailing they shall take up a lamentation for thee, and lament over thee, saying, Who is there like Tyre, like her that is brought to silence in the midst of the sea?
When thy wares went forth out of the seas, thou filled many peoples. Thou enriched the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy riches and of thy merchandise.
In the time that thou were broken by the seas in the depths of the waters, thy merchandise and all thy company fell in the midst of thee.
All the inhabitants of the isles are astonished at thee, and their kings are horribly afraid; they are troubled in their countenance.
The merchants among the peoples hiss at thee. Thou have become a horror, and thou shall nevermore have any being.

The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
Because thy heart is lifted up, and thou have said, I am a god. I sit in the seat of God, in the midst of the seas. Yet thou are man, and not God, though thou did set thy heart as the heart of God.
Behold, thou are wiser than Daniel. There is no secret that is hidden from thee.
By thy wisdom and by thine understanding thou have gotten thee riches, and have gotten gold and silver into thy treasures.
By thy great wisdom and by thy traffic thou have increased thy riches. And thy heart is lifted up because of thy riches.
Because thou have set thy heart as the heart of God,
therefore, behold, I will bring strangers upon thee, the terrible of the nations, and they shall draw their swords against the beauty of thy wisdom, and they shall defile thy brightness.
They shall bring thee down to the pit, and thou shall die the death of those who are slain, in the heart of the seas.
Will thou yet say before him who slays thee, I am God? But thou are man, and not God, in the hand of him who wounds thee.
Thou shall die the death of the uncircumcised by the hand of strangers. For I have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah.
Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Thou seal up the sum, full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty.
Thou were in Eden, the garden of God. Every precious stone was thy covering, the sardius, the topaz, and the diamond, the beryl, the onyx, and the jasper, the sapphire, the emerald, and the carbuncle, and gold. The workmanship of thy tambourine and of thy pipes was in thee. In the day that thou were created they were prepared.
Thou were the anointed cherub who covers. And I set thee, so that thou were upon the holy mountain of God. Thou have walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire.
Thou were perfect in thy ways from the day that thou were created, till unrighteousness was found in thee.
By the abundance of thy commerce they filled the midst of thee with violence, and thou have sinned. Therefore I have cast thee out of the mountain of God as profane, and I have destroyed thee, O covering cherub, from the midst of the stones of fire.
Thy heart was lifted up because of thy beauty. Thou have corrupted thy wisdom because of thy brightness. I have cast thee to the ground. I have laid thee before kings, that they may behold thee.
By the multitude of thine iniquities, in the unrighteousness of thy commerce, thou have profaned thy sanctuaries. Therefore I have brought forth a fire from the midst of thee. It has devoured thee, and I have turned thee to ashes upon the earth in the sight of all those who behold thee.
All those who know thee among the peoples shall be astonished at thee. Thou have become a horror, and thou shall nevermore have any being.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, set thy face toward Sidon, and prophesy against it,
Behold, I am against thee, O Sidon. And I will be glorified in the midst of thee. And they shall know that I am Jehovah, when I shall have executed judgments in her, and shall be sanctified in her.
For I will send pestilence into her, and blood into her streets. And the wounded shall fall in the midst of her, with the sword upon her on every side. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
And there shall no more be a pricking brier to the house of Israel, nor a hurting thorn of any who are round about them, who did spite to them. And they shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.
When I shall have gathered the house of Israel from the peoples among whom they are scattered, and shall be sanctified in them in the sight of the nations, then they shall dwell in their own land which I gave to my servant Jacob.
And they shall dwell securely therein. Yea, they shall build houses, and plant vineyards, and shall dwell securely, when I have executed judgments upon all those who do them spite round about them. And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God.

In the tenth year, in the tenth month, in the twelfth day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, set thy face against Pharaoh king of Egypt, and prophesy against him, and against all Egypt.
Behold, I am against thee, Pharaoh king of Egypt, the great monster that lies in the midst of his rivers, that has said, My river is my own, and I have made it for myself.
And I will put hooks in thy jaws, and I will cause the fish of thy rivers to stick to thy scales, and I will bring thee up out of the midst of thy rivers, with all the fish of thy rivers which stick to thy scales.
And I will cast thee forth into the wilderness, thee and all the fish of thy rivers. Thou shall fall upon the open field. Thou shall not be brought together, nor gathered. I have given thee for food to the beasts of the earth and to the birds of the heavens.
And all the inhabitants of Egypt shall know that I am Jehovah, because they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel.
When they took hold of thee by thy hand, thou broke, and tore all their shoulders. And when they leaned upon thee, thou broke, and made all their loins to be at a stand still.
Behold, I will bring a sword upon thee, and will cut off from thee man and beast.
And the land of Egypt shall be a desolation and a waste. And they shall know that I am Jehovah. Because he has said, The river is mine, and I have made it,
therefore, behold, I am against thee, and against thy rivers. And I will make the land of Egypt an utter waste and desolation, from the tower of Seveneh even to the border of Ethiopia.
No foot of man shall pass through it, nor foot of beast shall pass through it. Neither shall it be inhabited forty years.
And I will make the land of Egypt a desolation in the midst of the countries that are desolate. And her cities among the cities that are laid waste shall be a desolation forty years. And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.
At the end of forty years I will gather the Egyptians from the peoples where they were scattered,
and I will bring back the captivity of Egypt, and will cause them to return into the land of Pathros, into the land of their birth. And they shall be a base kingdom there.
It shall be the basest of the kingdoms, nor shall it lift itself up any more above the nations. And I will diminish them, that they shall no more rule over the nations.
And it shall be no more the confidence of the house of Israel, bringing iniquity to remembrance, when they turn to look after them. And they shall know that I am the lord Jehovah.
And it came to pass in the twenty-seventh year, in the first month, in the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon caused his army to serve a great service against Tyre. Every head was made bald, and every shoulder was worn, yet he had no wages, nor his army, from Tyre, for the service that he had served against it.
Behold, I will give the land of Egypt to Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and he shall carry off her multitude, and take her spoil, and take her prey. And it shall be the wages for his army.
I have given him the land of Egypt as his recompense for which he served, because they worked for me, says the lord Jehovah.
In that day I will cause a horn to bud forth to the house of Israel, and I will give thee the opening of the mouth in the midst of them. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.

The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
Wail ye, Alas for the day!
For the day is near, even the day of Jehovah is near. It shall be a day of clouds, a time of the nations.
And a sword shall come upon Egypt, and anguish shall be in Ethiopia, when the slain shall fall in Egypt, and they shall take away her multitude, and her foundations shall be broken down.
Ethiopia, and Put, and Lud, and all the mixed people, and Cub, and the sons of the land that is in league, shall fall with them by the sword.
They also who uphold Egypt shall fall, and the pride of her power shall come down. From the tower of Seveneh they shall fall in it by the sword, says the lord Jehovah.
And they shall be desolate in the midst of the countries that are desolate, and her cities shall be in the midst of the cities that are wasted.
And they shall know at I am Jehovah when I have set a fire in Egypt, and all her helpers are destroyed.
In that day messengers shall go forth from before me in ships to make the careless Ethiopians afraid, and there shall be anguish upon them, as in the day of Egypt, for, lo, it comes.
I will also make the multitude of Egypt to cease by the hand of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon.
He and his people with him, the terrible of the nations, shall be brought in to destroy the land. And they shall draw their swords against Egypt, and fill the land with the slain.
And I will make the rivers dry, and will sell the land into the hand of evil men. And I will make the land desolate, and all that is therein, by the hand of strangers. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
I will also destroy the idols, and I will cause the images to cease from Memphis. And there shall no more be a ruler from the land of Egypt. And I will put a fear in the land of Egypt.
And I will make Pathros desolate, and will set a fire in Zoan, and will execute judgments upon No.
And I will pour my wrath upon Sin, the stronghold of Egypt, and I will cut off the multitude of No.
And I will set a fire in Egypt. Sin shall be in great anguish, and No shall be broken up, and Memphis shall have adversaries in the daytime.
The young men of Aven and of Pi-beseth shall fall by the sword, and these cities shall go into captivity.
At Tehaphnehes also the day shall withdraw itself when I shall break the yokes of Egypt there, and the pride of her power shall cease in her. As for her, a cloud shall cover her, and her daughters shall go into captivity.
Thus I will execute judgments upon Egypt, and they shall know that I am Jehovah.
And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the first month, in the seventh day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, I have broken the arm of Pharaoh king of Egypt. And, lo, it has not been bound up, to apply medicines, to put a bandage to bind it, that it be strong to hold the sword.
Behold, I am against Pharaoh king of Egypt. And I will break his arms, the strong arm, and that which was broken, and I will cause the sword to fall out of his hand.
And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and will disperse them through the countries.
And I will strengthen the arms of the king of Babylon, and put my sword in his hand. But I will break the arms of Pharaoh, and he shall groan before him with the groanings of a mortally wounded man.
And I will hold up the arms of the king of Babylon, and the arms of Pharaoh shall fall down. And they shall know that I am Jehovah when I shall put my sword into the hand of the king of Babylon, and he shall stretch it out upon the land of Egypt.
And I will scatter the Egyptians among the nations, and disperse them through the countries. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.

And it came to pass in the eleventh year, in the third month, in the first day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, say to Pharaoh king of Egypt, and to his multitude, Whom are thou like in thy greatness?
Behold, the Assyrian was a cedar in Lebanon with fair branches, and with a forest-like shade, and of high stature, and its top was among the thick boughs.
The waters nourished it. The deep made it to grow. The rivers of it ran round about its plantation, and it sent out its channels to all the trees of the field.
Therefore its stature was exalted above all the trees of the field, and its boughs were multiplied, and its branches became long because of many waters, when it shot them forth.
All the birds of the heavens made their nests in its boughs, and under its branches all the beasts of the field brought forth their young, and under its shadow dwelt all great nations.
Thus it was beautiful in its greatness, in the length of its branches, for its root was by many waters.
The cedars in the garden of God could not dim it. The fir trees were not like its boughs, and the plane trees were not as its branches, nor was any tree in the garden of God like it in its beauty.
I made it beautiful by the multitude of its branches, so that all the trees of Eden, that were in the garden of God, envied it.
Because thou are exalted in stature, and he has set his top among the thick boughs, and his heart is lifted up in his height,
I will even deliver him into the hand of the mighty one of the nations. He shall surely deal with him; I have driven him out for his wickedness.
And strangers, the terrible of the nations, have cut him off, and have left him. Upon the mountains and in all the valleys his branches are fallen, and his boughs are broken by all the watercourses of the land. And all the peoples of the earth have gone down from his shadow, and have left him.
All the birds of the heavens shall dwell upon his ruin, and all the beasts of the field shall be upon his branches,
to the end that none of all the trees by the waters exalt themselves in their stature, neither set their top among the thick boughs, nor that their mighty ones stand up on their height, even all that drink water. For they are all delivered to death, to the nether parts of the earth, in the midst of the sons of men, with those who go down to the pit.
In the day when he went down to Sheol I caused a mourning. I covered the deep for him. And I restrained the rivers of it, and the great waters were stayed. And I caused Lebanon to mourn for him, and all the trees of the field fainted for him.
I made the nations to shake at the sound of his fall when I cast him down to Sheol with those who descend into the pit. And all the trees of Eden, the choice and best of Lebanon, all that drink water, were comforted in the nether parts of the earth.
They also went down into Sheol with him to those who are slain by the sword, yea, those who were his arm, that dwelt under his shadow in the midst of the nations.
To whom are thou thus like in glory and in greatness among the trees of Eden? Yet thou shall be brought down with the trees of Eden to the nether parts of the earth. Thou shall lie in the midst of the uncircumcised, with those who are slain by the sword. This is Pharaoh and all his multitude, says the lord Jehovah.

And it came to pass in the twelfth year, in the twelfth month, in the first day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, take up a lamentation over Pharaoh king of Egypt, and say to him, Thou were compared to a young lion of the nations. Yet thou are as a monster in the seas, and thou broke forth with thy rivers, and troubled the waters with thy feet, and fouled their rivers.
I will spread out my net upon thee with a company of many peoples, and they shall bring thee up in my net.
And I will leave thee upon the land. I will cast thee forth upon the open field, and will cause all the birds of the heavens to settle upon thee, and I will satisfy the beasts of the whole earth with thee.
And I will lay thy flesh upon the mountains, and fill the valleys with thy height.
I will also water the land, in which thou swim, with thy blood, even to the mountains. And the watercourses shall be full of thee.
And when I shall extinguish thee, I will cover the heavens, and make the stars of it dark. I will cover the sun with a cloud, and the moon shall not give its light.
All the bright lights of heaven I will make dark over thee, and set darkness upon thy land, says the lord Jehovah.
I will also vex the hearts of many peoples when I shall bring thy destruction among the nations, into the countries which thou have not known.
Yea, I will make many peoples amazed at thee. And their kings shall be horribly afraid for thee when I shall brandish my sword before them. And they shall tremble at every moment, each man for his own life, in the day of thy fall.
The sword of the king of Babylon shall come upon thee.
By the swords of the mighty I will cause thy multitude to fall. They are all the terrible of the nations. And they shall bring to nothing the pride of Egypt, and all the multitude of it shall be destroyed.
I will destroy also all the beasts thereof from beside many waters. Neither the foot of man shall trouble them any more, nor the hoofs of beasts trouble them.
Then I will make their waters clear, and cause their rivers to run like oil, says the lord Jehovah.
When I shall make the land of Egypt desolate and waste, a land destitute of that of which it was full, when I shall smite all those who dwell therein, then they shall know that I am Jehovah.
This is the lamentation with which they shall lament. The daughters of the nations shall lament with that over Egypt, and over all her multitude. They shall lament with that, says the lord Jehovah.
It came to pass also in the twelfth year, in the fifteenth day of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, wail for the multitude of Egypt, and cast them down, even her, and the daughters of the famous nations, to the nether parts of the earth, with those who go down into the pit.
Whom do thou pass in beauty? Go down, and be thou laid with the uncircumcised.
They shall fall in the midst of those who are slain by the sword. She is delivered to the sword. Draw her away and all her multitudes.
The strong among the mighty shall speak to him out of the midst of Sheol with those who help him. They have gone down. They lie still, even the uncircumcised, slain by the sword.
Asshur is there and all her company. Her graves are round about her, all of them slain, fallen by the sword,
whose graves are set in the outermost parts of the pit. And her company is round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who caused terror in the land of the living.
There is Elam and all her multitude round about her grave, all of them slain, fallen by the sword, who have gone down uncircumcised into the nether parts of the earth, who caused their terror in the land of the living, and have borne their shame with those who go down to the pit.
They have set a bed for her in the midst of the slain with all her multitude. Her graves are round about her, all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword. For their terror was caused in the land of the living, and they have borne their shame with those who go down to the pit. He is put in the midst of those who are slain.
There is Meshech, Tubal, and all their multitude. Their graves are round about them, all of them uncircumcised, slain by the sword, for they caused their terror in the land of the living.
And they shall not lie with the mighty who are fallen of the uncircumcised, who have gone down to Sheol with their weapons of war, and have laid their swords under their heads. But their iniquities are upon their bones, for they were the terror of the mighty in the land of the living.
But thou shall be broken in the midst of the uncircumcised, and shall lie with those who are slain by the sword.
There is Edom, its kings and all its rulers, who in their might are laid with those who are slain by the sword. They shall lie with the uncircumcised, and with those who go down to the pit.
There are the rulers of the north, all of them, and all the Sidonians, who have gone down with the slain. In the terror which they caused by their might they are put to shame. And they lie uncircumcised with those who are slain by the sword, and bear their shame with those who go down to the pit.
Pharaoh shall see them, and shall be comforted over all his multitude, even Pharaoh and all his army, slain by the sword, says the lord Jehovah.
For I have put his terror in the land of the living, and he shall be laid in the midst of the uncircumcised, with those who are slain by the sword, even Pharaoh and all his multitude, says the lord Jehovah.

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, speak to the sons of thy people, and say to them, When I bring the sword upon a land, and the people of the land take a man from among them, and set him for their watchman,
if, when he sees the sword come upon the land, he blows the trumpet, and warns the people,
then whoever hears the sound of the trumpet, and takes no warning, if the sword comes, and takes him away, his blood shall be upon his own head.
He heard the sound of the trumpet, and took no warning; his blood shall be upon him. Whereas if he had taken warning, he would have delivered his soul.
But if the watchman sees the sword come, and does not blow the trumpet, and the people are not warned, and the sword comes, and takes any person from among them, he is taken away in his iniquity, but I will require his blood at the watchman's hand.
So thou, son of man, I have set thee a watchman to the house of Israel. Therefore hear the word at my mouth, and give them warning from me.
When I say to the wicked man, O wicked man, thou shall surely die, and thou do not speak to warn the wicked man from his way, that wicked man shall die in his iniquity, but I will require his blood at thy hand.
Nevertheless, if thou warn the wicked man of his way to turn from it, and he does not turn from his way, he shall die in his iniquity, but thou have delivered thy soul.
And thou, son of man, say to the house of Israel, Thus ye speak, saying, Our transgressions and our sins are upon us, and we pine away in them. How then can we live?
Say to them, As I live, says the lord Jehovah, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked man, but that the wicked man turn from his way and live. Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, for why will ye die, O house of Israel?
And thou, son of man, say to the sons of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous man shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression. And as for the wickedness of the wicked man, he shall not fall by it in the day that he turns from his wickedness, nor shall he who is righteous be able to live by it in the day that he sins.
When I say to the righteous man, that he shall surely live, if he trusts his righteousness, and commits iniquity, none of his righteous deeds shall be remembered, but in his iniquity that he has committed, in it he shall die.
Again, when I say to the wicked man, Thou shall surely die, if he turns from his sin, and does that which is lawful and right,
if the wicked man restores the pledge, gives again that which he had taken by robbery, walks in the statutes of life, committing no iniquity, he shall surely live; he shall not die.
None of his sins that he has committed shall be remembered against him. He has done that which is lawful and right; he shall surely live.
Yet the sons of thy people say, The way of the Lord is not equitable. But as for them, their way is not equitable.
When the righteous man turns from his righteousness, and commits iniquity, he shall even die in it.
And when the wicked man turns from his wickedness, and does that which is lawful and right, he shall live thereby.
Yet ye say, The way of the Lord is not equitable. O house of Israel, I will judge you everyone according to his ways.
And it came to pass in the twelfth year of our captivity, in the tenth month, in the fifth day of the month, that a man who had escaped out of Jerusalem came to me, saying, The city is smitten.
Now the hand of Jehovah had been upon me in the evening, before he who escaped came. And he had opened my mouth until he came to me in the morning. And my mouth was opened, and I was no more mute.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, those who inhabit those waste places in the land of Israel speak, saying, Abraham was one, and he inherited the land, but we are many; the land is given us for inheritance.
Ye eat with the blood, and lift up your eyes to your idols, and shed blood. And shall ye possess the land?
Ye stand upon your sword, ye work abomination, and ye defile every man his neighbor's wife. And shall ye possess the land?
As I live, surely those who are in the waste places shall fall by the sword, and he who is in the open field I will give to the beasts to be devoured, and those who are in the strongholds and in the caves shall die of the pestilence.
And I will make the land a desolation and an astonishment. And the pride of her power shall cease. And the mountains of Israel shall be desolate, so that none shall pass through.
Then they shall know that I am Jehovah when I have made the land a desolation and an astonishment, because of all their abominations which they have committed.
And as for thee, son of man, the sons of thy people talk of thee by the walls and in the doors of the houses, and speak one to another, each one to his brother, saying, Come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that comes forth from Jehovah.
And they come to thee as the people come, and they sit before thee as my people. And they hear thy words, but do not do them. For with their mouth they show much love, but their heart goes after their gain.
And, lo, thou are to them as a very lovely song of he who has a pleasant voice, and can play well on an instrument. For they hear thy words, but they do not do them.
And when this comes to pass, (behold, it comes), then they shall know that a prophet has been among them.

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Woe to the shepherds of Israel who feed themselves! Should not the shepherds feed the sheep?
Ye eat the fat, and ye clothe yourselves with the wool. Ye kill the fatlings, but ye do not feed the sheep.
Ye have not strengthened the diseased, nor have ye healed that which was sick, nor have ye bound up that which was broken, nor have ye brought back that which was driven away, nor have ye sought that which was lost, but ye have ruled over them with force and with rigor.
And they were scattered because there was no shepherd. And they became food to all the beasts of the field, and were scattered.
My sheep wandered through all the mountains, and upon every high hill. Yea, my sheep were scattered upon all the face of the earth, and there was none who searched or sought.
As I live, says the lord Jehovah, surely inasmuch as my sheep became a prey, and my sheep became food to all the beasts of the field, because there was no shepherd, nor did my shepherds search for my sheep, but the shepherds fed themselves, and did not feed my sheep,
therefore, ye shepherds, hear the word of Jehovah.
Behold, I am against the shepherds, and I will require my sheep at their hand, and cause them to cease from feeding the sheep. Neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any more, and I will deliver my sheep from their mouth, that they may not be food for them.
Behold, I myself, even I, will search for my sheep, and will seek them out.
As a shepherd seeks out his flock, in the day that he is among his sheep that are scattered abroad, so I will seek out my sheep, and I will deliver them out of all places where they have been scattered in the cloudy and dark day.
And I will bring them out from the peoples, and gather them from the countries, and will bring them into their own land. And I will feed them upon the mountains of Israel, by the watercourses, and in all the inhabited places of the country.
I will feed them with good pasture, and their fold shall be upon the mountains of the height of Israel. There they shall lie down in a good fold, and on fat pasture they shall feed upon the mountains of Israel.
I myself will be the shepherd of my sheep, and I will cause them to lie down, says the lord Jehovah.
I will seek that which was lost, and will bring back that which was driven away, and will bind up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick, but I will destroy the fat and the strong. I will feed them in justice.
Behold, I judge between sheep and sheep, the rams and the he-goats.
Does it seem a small thing to you to have fed upon the good pasture, but ye must tread down with your feet the residue of your pasture, and to have drunk of the clear waters, but ye must foul the residue with your feet?
And as for my sheep, they eat that which ye have trodden with your feet, and they drink that which ye have fouled with your feet.
Behold, I, even I, will judge between the fat sheep and the lean sheep.
Because ye thrust with side and with shoulder, and push all the diseased with your horns, till ye have scattered them abroad,
therefore I will save my flock, and they shall no more be a prey. And I will judge between sheep and sheep.
And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them, even my servant David. He shall feed them, and he shall be their shepherd.
And I, Jehovah, will be their God, and my servant David ruler among them. I, Jehovah, have spoken it.
And I will make a covenant of peace with them, and will cause evil beasts to cease out of the land, and they shall dwell securely in the wilderness, and sleep in the woods.
And I will make them and the places round about my hill a blessing, and I will cause the shower to come down in its season; there shall be showers of blessing.
And the tree of the field shall yield its fruit, and the earth shall yield its increase, and they shall be secure in their land. And they shall know that I am Jehovah when I have broken the bars of their yoke, and have delivered them out of the hand of those who made bondmen of them.
And they shall no more be a prey to the nations, nor shall the beasts of the earth devour them, but they shall dwell securely, and none shall make them afraid.
And I will raise up to them a plantation for renown, and they shall no more be consumed with famine in the land, nor bear the shame of the nations any more.
And they shall know that I, Jehovah, their God am with them, and that they, the house of Israel, are my people, says the lord Jehovah.
And ye my sheep, the sheep of my pasture, are men, and I am your God, says the lord Jehovah.

Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, set thy face against mount Seir, and prophesy against it.
Behold, I am against thee, O mount Seir, and I will stretch out my hand against thee, and I will make thee a desolation and an astonishment.
I will lay thy cities waste, and thou shall be desolate. And thou shall know that I am Jehovah.
Because thou have had a perpetual enmity, and have given over the sons of Israel to the power of the sword in the time of their calamity, in the time of the iniquity of the end,
therefore, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, I will prepare thee to blood, and blood shall pursue thee. Since thou have not hated blood, therefore blood shall pursue thee.
Thus I will make mount Seir an astonishment and a desolation, and I will cut off from it him who passes through and him who returns.
And I will fill its mountains with its slain. In thy hills and in thy valleys and in all thy watercourses they shall fall who are slain with the sword.
I will make thee a perpetual desolation, and thy cities shall not be inhabited. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Because thou have said, These two nations and these two countries shall be mine, and we will possess it, whereas Jehovah was there,
therefore, as I live, says the lord Jehovah, I will do according to thine anger, and according to thine envy which thou have shown out of thy hatred against them. And I will make myself known among them when I shall judge thee.
And thou shall know that I, Jehovah, have heard all thy revilings which thou have spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying, They are laid desolate. They are given us to devour.
And ye have magnified yourselves against me with your mouth, and have multiplied your words against me. I have heard it.
When the whole earth rejoices, I will make thee desolate.
As thou rejoiced over the inheritance of the house of Israel, because it was desolate, so I will do to thee. Thou shall be desolate, O mount Seir, and all Edom, even all of it, and they shall know that I am Jehovah.

And thou, son of man, prophesy to the mountains of Israel, and say, Ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of Jehovah.
Because the enemy has said against you, Aha! and, The ancient high places are ours in possession,
Because, even because they have made you desolate, and swallowed you up on every side, that ye might be a possession to the residue of the nations, and ye are taken up in the lips of talkers, and the evil report of the people,
therefore, ye mountains of Israel, hear the word of the lord Jehovah. Thus says the lord Jehovah to the mountains and to the hills, to the watercourses and to the valleys, to the desolate wastes and to the cities that are forsaken, which have become a prey and derision to the residue of the nations that are round about,
Surely in the fire of my jealousy I have spoken against the residue of the nations, and against all Edom, who have appointed my land to themselves for a possession with the joy of all their heart, with spite of soul, to cast it out for a prey.
Behold, I have spoken in my jealousy and in my wrath, because ye have borne the shame of the nations.
I have sworn, saying, Surely the nations that are round about you, they shall bear their shame.
But ye, O mountains of Israel, ye shall shoot forth your branches, and yield your fruit to my people Israel, for they are at hand to come.
For, behold, I am for you, and I will turn into you, and ye shall be tilled and sown.
And I will multiply men upon you, all the house of Israel, even all of it, and the cities shall be inhabited, and the waste places shall be built.
And I will multiply upon you man and beast, and they shall increase and be fruitful. And I will cause you to be inhabited according to your former estate, and will do better to you than at your beginnings. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
Yea, I will cause men to walk upon you, even my people Israel, and they shall possess thee, and thou shall be their inheritance, and thou shall no more henceforth bereave them of sons.
Because they say to you, Thou O land are a devourer of men, and have been a bereaver of thy nation,
therefore thou shall no more devour men, nor bereave thy nation any more, says the lord Jehovah.
Neither will I let thee hear any more the shame of the nations, nor shall thou bear the reproach of the peoples any more, nor shall thou cause thy nation to stumble any more, says the lord Jehovah.
Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, when the house of Israel dwelt in their own land, they defiled it by their way and by their doings. Their way before me was as the uncleanness of a woman in her impurity.
Therefore I poured out my wrath upon them for the blood which they had poured out upon the land, and because they had defiled it with their idols.
And I scattered them among the nations, and they were dispersed through the countries. I judged them according to their way and according to their doings.
And when they came to the nations where they went, they profaned my holy name, in that men said of them, These are the people of Jehovah, and have gone forth out of his land.
But I had regard for my holy name, which the house of Israel had profaned among the nations where they went.
I do this not for your sake, O house of Israel, but for my holy name, which ye have profaned among the nations where ye went.
And I will sanctify my great name, which has been profaned among the nations, which ye have profaned in the midst of them. And the nations shall know that I am Jehovah, says the lord Jehovah, when I shall be sanctified in you before their eyes.
For I will take you from among the nations, and gather you out of all the countries, and will bring you into your own land.
And I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be clean. I will cleanse you from all your filthiness, and from all your idols.
I will also give you a new heart, and I will put a new spirit within you. And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a heart of flesh.
And I will put my Spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my ordinances, and do them.
And ye shall dwell in the land that I gave to your fathers, and ye shall be my people, and I will be your God.
And I will save you from all your uncleannesses. And I will call for the grain, and will multiply it, and lay no famine upon you.
And I will multiply the fruit of the tree, and the increase of the field, that ye may no more receive the reproach of famine among the nations.
Then ye shall remember your evil ways, and your doings that were not good. And ye shall loathe yourselves in your own sight for your iniquities and for your abominations.
I do this not for your sake, says the lord Jehovah; be it known to you. Be ashamed and confounded for your ways, O house of Israel.
In the day that I cleanse you from all your iniquities, I will cause the cities to be inhabited, and the waste places shall be built.
And the land that was desolate shall be tilled, whereas it was a desolation in the sight of all who passed by.
And they shall say, This land that was desolate has become like the garden of Eden. And the waste and desolate and ruined cities are fortified and inhabited.
Then the nations that are left round about you shall know that I, Jehovah, have built the ruined places, and planted that which was desolate. I, Jehovah, have spoken it, and I will do it.
For this, moreover, I will be inquired of by the house of Israel, to do it for them. I will increase them with men like a flock.
As the flock for sacrifice, as the flock of Jerusalem in her appointed feasts, so shall the waste cities be filled with flocks of men. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.

The hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he brought me out in the Spirit of Jehovah, and set me down in the midst of the valley, and it was full of bones.
And he caused me to pass by them round about. And, behold, there were very many in the open valley, and, lo, they were very dry.
And he said to me, Son of man, can these bones live? And I answered, O lord Jehovah, thou know.
Again he said to me, Prophesy over these bones, and say to them, O ye dry bones, hear the word of Jehovah.
Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live.
And I will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh upon you, and cover you with skin, and put breath in you, and ye shall live. And ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
So I prophesied as I was commanded. And as I prophesied, there was a noise, and, behold, an earthquake, and the bones came together, bone to its bone.
And I beheld, and, lo, there were sinews upon them, and flesh came up, and skin covered them above, but there was no breath in them.
Come from the four winds, O breath, and breathe upon these slain, that they may live.
So I prophesied as he commanded me, and the breath came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an exceedingly great army.
Then he said to me, Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel. Behold, they say, Our bones are dried up, and our hope is lost. We are clean cut off.
Behold, I will open your graves, and cause you to come up out of your graves, O my people, and I will bring you into the land of Israel.
And ye shall know that I am Jehovah when I have opened your graves, and caused you to come up out of your graves, O my people.
And I will put my Spirit in you, and ye shall live. And I will place you in your own land. And ye shall know that I, Jehovah, have spoken it and performed it, says Jehovah.
The word of Jehovah came again to me, saying,
And thou, son of man, take thee one stick, and write upon it, For Judah, and for the sons of Israel his companions. Then take another stick, and write upon it, For Joseph, the stick of Ephraim, and for all the house of Israel his companions.
And join them one to another into one stick for thyself, that they may become one in thy hand.
And when the sons of thy people shall speak to thee, saying, Will thou not show us what thou mean by these?
Behold, I will take the stick of Joseph, which is in the hand of Ephraim, and the tribes of Israel his companions, and I will put them with it, even with the stick of Judah, and make them one stick, and they shall be one in my hand.
And the sticks on which thou write shall be in thy hand before their eyes.
Behold, I will take the sons of Israel from among the nations where they have gone, and will gather them on every side, and bring them into their own land.
And I will make them one nation in the land, upon the mountains of Israel, and one king shall be king to them all. And they shall no more be two nations, nor shall they be divided into two kingdoms any more at all.
Neither shall they defile themselves any more with their idols, nor with their detestable things, nor with any of their transgressions, but I will save them out of all their dwelling-places in which they have sinned, and will cleanse them. So they shall be my people, and I will be their God.
And my servant David shall be king over them, and they all shall have one shepherd. They shall also walk in my ordinances, and observe my statutes, and do them.
And they shall dwell in the land that I have given to Jacob my servant, in which your fathers dwelt. And they shall dwell therein, they, and their sons, and their son's sons, forever. And David my servant shall be their ruler forever.
Moreover I will make a covenant of peace with them. It shall be an everlasting covenant with them, and I will place them, and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in the midst of them for evermore.
My tabernacle shall also be with them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
And the nations shall know that I am Jehovah, who sanctifies Israel, when my sanctuary shall be in the midst of them for evermore.

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Son of man, set thy face toward Gog, of the land of Magog, the ruler of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, and prophesy against him.
Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, ruler of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal.
And I will turn thee about, and put hooks into thy jaws, and I will bring thee forth, and all thine army, horses and horsemen, all of them clothed in full armor, a great company with buckler and shield, all of them handling swords,
Persia, Cush, and Put with them, all of them with shield and helmet,
Gomer, and all his hordes, the house of Togarmah in the outermost parts of the north, and all his hordes, even many peoples with thee.
Be thou prepared. Yea, prepare thyself, thou, and all thy companies that are assembled to thee, and be thou a guard to them.
After many days thou shall be visited. In the latter years thou shall come into the land that is brought back from the sword, that is gathered out of many peoples, upon the mountains of Israel, which have been a continual waste, but it is brought forth out of the peoples, and they shall dwell securely, all of them.
And thou shall ascend. Thou shall come like a storm. Thou shall be like a cloud to cover the land, thou, and all thy hordes, and many peoples with thee.
It shall come to pass in that day, that things shall come into thy mind, and thou shall devise an evil plan.
And thou shall say, I will go up to the land of unwalled villages. I will go to those who are at rest, who dwell securely, all of them dwelling without walls, and having neither bars nor gates,
to take the spoil and to take the prey, to turn thy hand against the waste places that are now inhabited, and against the people who are gathered out of the nations, who have gotten cattle and goods, who dwell in the middle of the earth.
Sheba, and Dedan, and the merchants of Tarshish, with all the young lions of it, shall say to thee, Have thou come to take the spoil? Have thou assembled thy company to take the prey, to carry away silver and gold, to take away cattle and goods, to take great spoil?
In that day when my people Israel dwell securely, shall thou not know it?
And thou shall come from thy place out of the outermost parts of the north, thou, and many peoples with thee, all of them riding upon horses, a great company and a mighty army.
And thou shall come up against my people Israel, as a cloud to cover the land. It shall come to pass in the latter days, that I will bring thee against my land, that the nations may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee, O Gog, before their eyes.
Are thou he of whom I spoke in old time by my servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied in those days for many years that I would bring thee against them?
And it shall come to pass in that day, when Gog shall come against the land of Israel, says the lord Jehovah, that my wrath shall come up into my nostrils.
For I have spoken in my jealousy and in the fire of my wrath. Surely in that day there shall be a great shaking in the land of Israel,
so that the fishes of the sea, and the birds of the heavens, and the beasts of the field, and all creeping things that creep upon the earth, and all the men who are upon the face of the earth, shall shake at my presence. And the mountains shall be thrown down, and the steep places shall fall, and every wall shall fall to the ground.
And I will call for a sword against him to all my mountains, says the lord Jehovah. Every man's sword shall be against his brother.
And I will enter into judgment with him with pestilence and with blood. And I will rain upon him, and upon his hordes, and upon the many peoples who are with him, an overflowing shower, and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone.
And I will magnify myself, and sanctify myself, and I will make myself known in the eyes of many nations. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.

Behold, I am against thee, O Gog, ruler of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal.
And I will turn thee about, and will lead thee on, and will cause thee to come up from the outermost parts of the north, and I will bring thee upon the mountains of Israel.
And I will smite thy bow out of thy left hand, and will cause thine arrows to fall out of thy right hand.
Thou shall fall upon the mountains of Israel, thou, and all thy hordes, and the peoples who are with thee. I will give thee to the ravenous birds of every sort, and to the beasts of the field to be devoured.
Thou shall fall upon the open field, for I have spoken it, says the lord Jehovah.
And I will send a fire on Magog, and on those who dwell securely in the isles. And they shall know that I am Jehovah.
And I will make my holy name known in the midst of my people Israel, nor will I allow my holy name to be profaned any more. And the nations shall know that I am Jehovah, the Holy One in Israel.
Behold, it comes, and it shall be done, says the lord Jehovah. This is the day of which I have spoken.
And those who dwell in the cities of Israel shall go forth, and shall make fires of the weapons and burn them, both the shields and the bucklers, the bows and the arrows, and the hand staves, and the spears. And they shall make fires of them seven years,
so that they shall take no wood out of the field, nor cut down any out of the forests, for they shall make fires of the weapons. And they shall plunder those who plundered them, and rob those who robbed them, says the lord Jehovah.
the valley of those who pass through on the east of the sea. And it shall stop those who pass through, and they shall bury Gog and all his multitude there. And they shall call it The valley of Hamon-gog.
And the house of Israel shall be burying them seven months, that they may cleanse the land.
Yea, all the people of the land shall bury them, and it shall be to them a renown in the day that I shall be glorified, says the lord Jehovah.
And they shall set apart men of continual employment, who shall pass through the land. And, with those who pass through, those that bury those who remain upon the face of the land, to cleanse it, after the end of seven months they shall search.
And those who pass through the land shall pass through, and when any man sees a man's bone, then he shall set up a sign by it till the buriers have buried it in the valley of Hamon-gog.
And Hamonah shall also be the name of a city. Thus they shall cleanse the land.
Speak to the birds of every sort, and to every beast of the field, Assemble yourselves, and come. Gather yourselves on every side to my sacrifice that I sacrifice for you, even a great sacrifice upon the mountains of Israel, that ye may eat flesh and drink blood.
Ye shall eat the flesh of the mighty, and drink the blood of the rulers of the earth, of rams, of lambs, and of goats, of bullocks, all of them fatlings of Bashan.
And ye shall eat fat till ye be full, and drink blood till ye be drunken, of my sacrifice which I have sacrificed for you.
And ye shall be filled at my table with horses and chariots, with mighty men, and with all men of war, says the lord Jehovah.
And I will set my glory among the nations. And all the nations shall see my judgment that I have executed, and my hand that I have laid upon them.
So the house of Israel shall know that I am Jehovah their God, from that day and forward.
And the nations shall know that the house of Israel went into captivity for their iniquity, because they trespassed against me, and I hid my face from them. So I gave them into the hand of their adversaries, and they fell all of them by the sword.
I did to them according to their uncleanness and according to their transgressions. And I hid my face from them.
Now I will bring back the captivity of Jacob, and have mercy upon the whole house of Israel. And I will be jealous for my holy name.
And they shall bear their shame, and all their trespasses by which they have trespassed against me, when they shall dwell securely in their land. And none shall make them afraid
when I have brought them back from the peoples, and gathered them out of their enemies' lands, and am sanctified in them in the sight of many nations.
And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God, in that I caused them to go into captivity among the nations, and have gathered them to their own land. And I will leave none of them any more there,
nor will I hide my face any more from them. For I have poured out my Spirit upon the house of Israel, says the lord Jehovah.

In the twenty-fifth year of our captivity, in the beginning of the year, in the tenth day of the month, in the fourteenth year after the city was smitten, in the selfsame day, the hand of Jehovah was upon me, and he brought me there.
He brought me in the visions of God into the land of Israel, and set me down upon a very high mountain, upon which was as it were the frame of a city on the south.
And he brought me there, and, behold, there was a man, whose appearance was like the appearance of brass, with a line of flax in his hand, and a measuring reed. And he stood in the gate.
And the man said to me, Son of man, behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears, and set thy heart upon all that I shall show thee. For thou are brought here to the intent that I may show them to thee. Declare all that thou see to the house of Israel.
And, behold, a wall on the outside of the house round about, and in the man's hand a measuring reed six cubits long, of a cubit and a handbreadth each. So he measured the thickness of the building, one reed, and the height, one reed.
Then he came to the gate which looks toward the east, and went up the steps of it. And he measured the threshold of the gate, one reed broad, and the other threshold, one reed broad.
And every little chamber was one reed long, and one reed broad, and the space between the little chambers was five cubits. And the threshold of the gate by the porch of the gate toward the house was one reed.
He also measured the porch of the gate toward the house, one reed.
Then he measured the porch of the gate, eight cubits, and the posts thereof, two cubits. And the porch of the gate was toward the house.
And the little chambers of the gate eastward were three on this side, and three on that side; those three were of one measure. And the posts had one measure on this side and on that side.
And he measured the breadth of the opening of the gate, ten cubits, and the length of the gate, thirteen cubits,
and a border before the little chambers, one cubit on this side, and a border, one cubit on that side, and the little chambers, six cubits on this side, and six cubits on that side.
And he measured the gate from the roof of the one little chamber to the roof of the other, a breadth of twenty-five cubits, door against door.
He also made posts, sixty cubits. And the court reached to the posts, round about the gate.
And from the forefront of the gate at the entrance to the forefront of the inner porch of the gate were fifty cubits.
And there were closed windows to the little chambers, and to their posts within the gate round about, and likewise to the arches. And windows were round about inward, and upon each post were palm trees.
Then he brought me into the outer court. And, lo, there were chambers and a pavement, made for the court round about; thirty chambers were upon the pavement.
And the pavement was by the side of the gates, answerable to the length of the gates, even the lower pavement.
Then he measured the breadth from the forefront of the lower gate to the forefront of the inner court outside, a hundred cubits, both on the east and on the north.
And the gate of the outer court whose view is toward the north, he measured the length of it and the breadth of it.
the length of it was fifty cubits, and the breadth twenty-five cubits.
And the windows of it, and the arches of it, and the palm trees of it, were according to the measure of the gate whose view is toward the east. And they went up to it by seven steps, and the arches of it were before them.
And there was a gate to the inner court opposite the other gate, both on the north and on the east, and he measured from gate to gate a hundred cubits.
And he led me toward the south. And, behold, a gate toward the south. And he measured the posts of it and the arches of it according to these measures.
the length was fifty cubits, and the breadth twenty-five cubits.
And there were seven steps to go up to it, and the arches of it were before them. And it had palm trees, one on this side, and another on that side, upon the posts of it.
And there was a gate to the inner court toward the south. And he measured from gate to gate toward the south a hundred cubits.
Then he brought me to the inner court by the south gate. And he measured the south gate according to these measures,
and the little chambers of it, and the posts of it, and the arches of it, according to these measures. And there were windows in it and in the arches of it round about. It was fifty cubits long, and twenty-five cubits broad.
And there were arches round about, twenty-five cubits long, and five cubits broad.
And the arches of it were toward the outer court, and palm trees were upon the posts of it. And the ascent to it had eight steps.
And he brought me into the inner court toward the east. And he measured the gate according to these measures,
and the little chambers of it, and the posts of it, and the arches of it, according to these measures. And there were windows in it and in the arches of it round about. It was fifty cubits long, and twenty-five cubits broad.
And the arches of it were toward the outer court, and palm trees were upon the posts of it, on this side, and on that side. And the ascent to it had eight steps.
And he brought me to the north gate. And he measured it according to these measures,
the little chambers of it, the posts of it, and the arches of it. And there were windows in it round about. The length was fifty cubits, and the breadth twenty-five cubits.
And the posts of it were toward the outer court, and palm trees were upon the posts of it, on this side, and on that side. And the ascent to it had eight steps.
And a chamber with the door of it was by the posts at the gates. There they washed the burnt offering.
And in the porch of the gate were two tables on this side, and two tables on that side, to kill on it the burnt offering and the sin offering and the trespass offering.
And on the one side outside, at the going up to the entry of the gate toward the north, were two tables, and on the other side, which belonged to the porch of the gate, were two tables.
Four tables were on this side, and four tables on that side, by the side of the gate, eight tables, upon which they killed the sacrifices.
And there were four tables for the burnt offering, of hewn stone, a cubit and a half long, and a cubit and a half broad, and one cubit high, upon which they laid the instruments of which they killed the burnt offering and the sacrifice.
And the hooks, a handbreadth long, were fastened inside round about. And upon the tables was the flesh of the oblation.
And outside the inner gate were chambers for the singers in the inner court, which was at the side of the north gate, and their view was toward the south, one at the side of the east gate having the view toward the north.
And he said to me, This chamber, whose view is toward the south, is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the house.
And the chamber whose view is toward the north is for the priests, the keepers of the charge of the altar. These are the sons of Zadok, who from among the sons of Levi come near to Jehovah to minister to him.
And he measured the court, a hundred cubits long, and a hundred cubits broad, foursquare. And the altar was before the house.
Then he brought me to the porch of the house, and measured each post of the porch, five cubits on this side, and five cubits on that side. And the breadth of the gate was three cubits on this side, and three cubits on that side.
The length of the porch was twenty cubits, and the breadth eleven cubits, even by the steps by which they went up to it. And there were pillars by the posts, one on this side, and another on that side.

And he brought me to the temple, and measured the posts, six cubits broad on the one side, and six cubits broad on the other side, which was the breadth of the tabernacle.
And the breadth of the entrance was ten cubits. And the sides of the entrance were five cubits on the one side, and five cubits on the other side. And he measured the length of it, forty cubits, and the breadth, twenty cubits.
Then he went inward, and measured each post of the entrance, two cubits, and the entrance, six cubits, and the breadth of the entrance, seven cubits.
And he measured the length of it, twenty cubits, and the breadth, twenty cubits, before the temple. And he said to me, This is the most holy place.
Then he measured the wall of the house, six cubits, and the breadth of every side-chamber, four cubits, round about the house on every side.
And the side-chambers were in three stories, one over another, and thirty in order. And they entered into the wall which belonged to the house for the side-chambers round about, that they might be attached to it, and not be attached to the wall of the house.
And the side-chambers were broader as they circled the house higher and higher, for the circling of the house went higher and higher round about the house. Therefore the breadth of the house continued upward, and so increased from the lowest chamber to the highest by the middle chamber.
I also saw that the house had a raised basement round about. The foundations of the side-chambers were a full reed of six great cubits.
The thickness of the wall, which was for the side-chambers, on the outside, was five cubits. And that which was left was the place of the side-chambers that belonged to the house.
And between the chambers was a breadth of twenty cubits round about the house on every side.
And the doors of the side-chambers were toward the place that was left, one door toward the north, and another door toward the south. And the breadth of the place that was left was five cubits round about.
And the building that was before the separate place at the side toward the west was seventy cubits broad, and the wall of the building was five cubits thick round about, and the length of it ninety cubits.
So he measured the house, a hundred cubits long, and the separate place, and the building, with the walls of it, a hundred cubits long,
also the breadth of the face of the house, and of the separate place toward the east, a hundred cubits.
And he measured the length of the building before the separate place which was at the back of it, and the galleries of it on the one side and on the other side, a hundred cubits, and the inner temple, and the porches of the court,
the thresholds, and the closed windows, and the galleries round about on their three stories, opposite the threshold, paneled with wood round about, and from the ground up to the windows, (now the windows were covered),
to the space above the door, even to the inner house, and outside, and by all the wall round about inside and outside, by measure.
And it was made with cherubim and palm trees, and a palm tree was between cherub and cherub. And every cherub had two faces,
so that there was the face of a man toward the palm tree on the one side, and the face of a young lion toward the palm tree on the other side, made through all the house round about.
Cherubim and palm trees were made from the ground to above the door. Thus was the wall of the temple.
As for the temple, the door-posts were squared. And as for the face of the sanctuary, the appearance was as the appearance of the temple.
The altar was of wood, three cubits high, and the length of it two cubits, and the corners of it, and the length of it, and the walls of it, were of wood. And he said to me, This is the table that is before Jehovah.
And the temple and the sanctuary had two doors.
And the doors had two leaves apiece, two turning leaves, two for the one door, and two leaves for the other.
And there were made on them, on the doors of the temple, cherubim and palm trees, just as were made upon the walls. And there was a threshold of wood upon the face of the porch outside.
And there were closed windows and palm trees on the one side and on the other side, on the sides of the porch. Thus were the side-chambers of the house, and the thresholds.

Then he brought me forth into the outer court, the way toward the north. And he brought me into the chamber that was opposite the separate place, and which was opposite the building toward the north.
In front was the north door, the length of a hundred cubits, and the breadth was fifty cubits.
Opposite the twenty which belonged to the inner court, and opposite the pavement which belonged to the outer court, was gallery against gallery in the third story.
And before the chambers was a walk of ten cubits' breadth inward, a way of one cubit, and their doors were toward the north.
Now the upper chambers were shorter, for the galleries took away from these, more than from the lower and the middlemost, in the building.
For they were in three stories, and they did not have pillars as the pillars of the courts. Therefore the uppermost was narrowed more than the lowest and the middlemost from the ground.
And the wall that was outside by the side of the chambers, toward the outer court before the chambers, the length of it was fifty cubits.
For the length of the chambers that were in the outer court was fifty cubits. And, lo, of those on the front of the temple were a hundred cubits.
And from under these chambers was the entry on the east side, as going into them from the outer court.
In the thickness of the wall of the court toward the east, before the separate place, and before the building, there were chambers.
And the way before them was like the appearance of the way of the chambers which were toward the north. According to their length so was their breadth. And all their exits were both according to their fashions, and according to their doors.
And according to the doors of the chambers that were toward the south was a door at the head of the way, even the way directly before the wall toward the east, as entering into them.
Then he said to me, The north chambers and the south chambers, which are before the separate place, they are the holy chambers, where the priests that are near to Jehovah shall eat the most holy things. There they shall lay the most holy things, and the meal offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering, for the place is holy.
When the priests enter in, then they shall not go out of the holy place into the outer court, but they shall lay their garments there in which they minister, for they are holy. And they shall put on other garments, and shall approach to that which pertains to the people.
Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house, he brought me forth by the way of the gate whose view is toward the east, and measured it round about.
He measured on the east side with the measuring reed, five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed round about.
He measured on the north side five hundred reeds with the measuring reed round about.
He measured on the south side five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.
He turned about to the west side, and measured five hundred reeds with the measuring reed.
He measured it on the four sides. It had a wall round about, the length five hundred, and the breadth five hundred, to make a separation between that which was holy and that which was common.

Afterward he brought me to the gate, even the gate that looks toward the east.
And, behold, the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east. And his voice was like the sound of many waters, and the earth shone with his glory.
And it was according to the appearance of the vision which I saw, even according to the vision that I saw when I came to destroy the city. And the visions were like the vision that I saw by the river Chebar. And I fell upon my face.
And the glory of Jehovah came into the house by the way of the gate whose view is toward the east.
And the Spirit took me up, and brought me into the inner court, and, behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the house.
And I heard speaking to me out of the house, and a man stood by me.
And he said to me, Son of man, this is the place of my throne, and the place of the soles of my feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the sons of Israel forever. And the house of Israel shall no more defile my holy name, neither they, nor their kings, by their whoredom, and by the dead bodies of their kings in their high places,
in their setting of their threshold by my threshold, and their door-post beside my door-post, and there was but the wall between me and them. And they have defiled my holy name by their abominations which they have committed. Therefore I have consumed them in my anger.
Now let them put away their whoredom, and the dead bodies of their kings, far from me, and I will dwell in the midst of them forever.
Thou, son of man, show the house to the house of Israel, that they may be ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the pattern.
And if they be ashamed of all that they have done, make known to them the form of the house, and the fashion of it, and the exits of it, and the entrances of it, and all the forms of it, and all the ordinances of it, and all the forms of it, and all the laws of it. And write it in their sight, that they may keep the whole form of it, and all the ordinances of it, and do them.
This is the law of the house. Upon the top of the mountain the whole limit of it round about shall be most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house.
And these are the measures of the altar by cubits (the cubit is a cubit and a handbreadth). The bottom shall be a cubit, and the breadth a cubit, and the border of it by the edge of it round about a span. And this shall be the base of the altar.
And from the bottom upon the ground to the lower ledge shall be two cubits, and the breadth one cubit. And from the lesser ledge to the greater ledge shall be four cubits, and the breadth a cubit.
And the upper altar shall be four cubits. And from the altar hearth and upward there shall be four horns.
And the altar hearth shall be twelve long by twelve broad, square in the four sides of it.
And the ledge shall be fourteen long by fourteen broad in the four sides of it. And the border about it shall be half a cubit, and the bottom of it shall be a cubit round about. And the steps of it shall look toward the east.
These are the ordinances of the altar in the day when they shall make it, to offer burnt offerings on it, and to sprinkle blood on it.
Thou shall give to the priests the Levites who are of the seed of Zadok, who are near to me, to minister to me, says the lord Jehovah, a young bullock for a sin offering.
And thou shall take of the blood of it, and put it on the four horns of it, and on the four corners of the ledge, and upon the border round about. Thus thou shall cleanse it and make atonement for it.
Thou shall also take the bullock of the sin offering, and it shall be burnt in the appointed place of the house, outside the sanctuary.
And on the second day thou shall offer a he-goat without blemish for a sin offering. And they shall cleanse the altar, as they cleansed it with the bullock.
When thou have made an end of cleansing it, thou shall offer a young bullock without blemish, and a ram out of the flock without blemish.
And thou shall bring them near before Jehovah, and the priests shall cast salt upon them, and they shall offer them up for a burnt offering to Jehovah.
Seven days thou shall prepare each day a goat for a sin offering. They shall also prepare a young bullock, and a ram out of the flock, without blemish.
Seven days they shall make atonement for the altar and purify it. So they shall consecrate it.
And when they have accomplished the days, it shall be that upon the eighth day, and forward, the priests shall make your burnt offerings upon the altar, and your peace offerings. And I will accept you, says the lord Jehovah.

Then he brought me back by the way of the outer gate of the sanctuary, which looks toward the east. And it was shut.
And Jehovah said to me, This gate shall be shut. It shall not be opened, nor shall any man enter in by it, for Jehovah, the God of Israel, has entered in by it. Therefore it shall be shut.
As for the ruler, he shall sit in it as ruler to eat bread before Jehovah. He shall enter by the way of the porch of the gate, and shall go out by the way of the same.
Then he brought me by the way of the north gate before the house. And I looked, and, behold, the glory of Jehovah filled the house of Jehovah. And I fell upon my face.
And Jehovah said to me, Son of man, mark well, and behold with thine eyes, and hear with thine ears all that I say to thee concerning all the ordinances of the house of Jehovah, and all the laws of it. And mark well the entrance of the house, with every exit of the sanctuary.
O ye house of Israel, let it suffice you of all your abominations,
in that ye have brought in foreigners, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my sanctuary, to profane it, even my house, when ye offer my bread, the fat and the blood. And they have broken my covenant, to add to all your abominations.
And ye have not kept the charge of my holy things, but ye have set keepers of my charge in my sanctuary for yourselves.
No foreigner, uncircumcised in heart and uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into my sanctuary, of any foreigners that are among the sons of Israel.
But the Levites who went far from me, when Israel went astray, who went astray from me after their idols, they shall bear their iniquity.
Yet they shall be ministers in my sanctuary, having oversight at the gates of the house, and ministering in the house. They shall kill the burnt offering and the sacrifice for the people, and they shall stand before them to minister to them.
Because they ministered to them before their idols, and became a stumbling block of iniquity to the house of Israel, therefore I have lifted up my hand against them, says the lord Jehovah, and they shall bear their iniquity.
And they shall not come near to me, to execute the office of priest to me, nor to come near to any of my holy things, to the things that are most holy, but they shall bear their shame, and their abominations which they have committed.
Yet I will make them keepers of the charge of the house, for all the service of it, and for all that shall be done in it.
they shall enter into my sanctuary, and they shall come near to my table, to minister to me, and they shall keep my charge.
And it shall be that, when they enter in at the gates of the inner court, they shall be clothed with linen garments, and no wool shall come upon them, while they minister in the gates of the inner court, and within.
They shall have linen headdresses upon their heads, and shall have linen breeches upon their loins. They shall not gird themselves with anything that causes sweat.
And when they go forth into the outer court, even into the outer court to the people, they shall put off their garments in which they minister, and lay them in the holy chambers. And they shall put on other garments, that they not sanctify the people with their garments.
Neither shall they shave their heads, nor allow their locks to grow long. They shall only cut off the hair of their heads.
Neither shall any of the priests drink wine when they enter into the inner court.
Neither shall they take for their wives a widow, nor her who is put away, but they shall take virgins of the seed of the house of Israel, or a widow who is the widow of a priest.
And they shall teach my people the difference between the holy and the common, and cause them to discern between the unclean and the clean.
And in a controversy they shall stand to judge. They shall judge it according to my ordinances. And they shall keep my laws and my statutes in all my appointed feasts, and they shall hallow my sabbaths.
And they shall go in to no dead person to defile themselves. But for father, or for mother, or for son, or for daughter, for brother, or for sister who has had no husband, they may defile themselves.
And after he is cleansed, they shall reckon to him seven days.
And in the day that he goes into the sanctuary, into the inner court, to minister in the sanctuary, he shall offer his sin offering, says the lord Jehovah.
I am their inheritance. And ye shall give them no possession in Israel. I am their possession.
They shall eat the meal offering, and the sin offering, and the trespass offering. And every devoted thing in Israel shall be theirs.
And the first of all the first-fruits of every thing, and every oblation of everything, of all your oblations, shall be for the priest. Ye shall also give to the priests the first of your dough, to cause a blessing to rest on thy house.
The priests shall not eat of anything that dies of itself, or is torn, whether it be bird or beast.

Moreover, when ye shall divide the land by lot for inheritance, ye shall offer an oblation to Jehovah, a holy portion of the land. The length shall be the length of twenty-five thousand measures, and the breadth shall be ten thousand. It shall be holy in all the border of it round about.
Of this there shall be for the holy place five hundred by five hundred square round about, and fifty cubits for the suburbs of it round about.
And of this measure thou shall measure a length of twenty-five thousand, and a breadth of ten thousand. And the sanctuary shall be in it, which is most holy.
It is a holy portion of the land. It shall be for the priests, the ministers of the sanctuary, who come near to minister to Jehovah, and it shall be a place for their houses, and a holy place for the sanctuary.
And twenty-five thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth, shall be to the Levites, the ministers of the house, for a possession to themselves, for twenty chambers.
And ye shall appoint the possession of the city five thousand broad, and twenty-five thousand long, side by side with the oblation of the holy portion. It shall be for the whole house of Israel.
And whatever is for the ruler shall be on the one side and on the other side of the holy oblation and of the possession of the city, in front of the holy oblation and in front of the possession of the city, on the west side westward, and on the east side eastward, and in length answerable to one of the portions, from the west border to the east border.
It shall be to him for a possession in the land in Israel. And my rulers shall no more oppress my people, but they shall give the land to the house of Israel according to their tribes.
Let it suffice you, O rulers of Israel. Remove violence and spoil, and execute justice and righteousness. Take away your exactions from my people, says the lord Jehovah.
Ye shall have just balances, and a just ephah, and a just bath.
The ephah and the bath shall be of one measure, that the bath may contain the tenth part of a homer, and the ephah the tenth part of a homer. The measure of it shall be according to the homer.
And the shekel shall be twenty gerahs. Twenty shekels, twenty-five shekels, fifteen shekels, shall be your maneh.
The sixth part of an ephah from a homer of wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of an ephah from a homer of barley,
and the set portion of oil, of the bath of oil, the tenth part of a bath out of the cor, which is ten baths, even a homer, (for ten baths are a homer),
and one lamb of the flock, out of two hundred, from the well-watered pastures of Israel, for a meal offering, and for a burnt offering, and for peace offerings, to make atonement for them, says the lord Jehovah.
All the people of the land shall give to this oblation for the ruler in Israel.
And it shall be the ruler's part to give the burnt offerings, and the meal offerings, and the drink offerings, in the feasts, and on the new moons, and on the sabbaths, in all the appointed feasts of the house of Israel. He shall prepare the sin offering, and the meal offering, and the burnt offering, and the peace offerings, to make atonement for the house of Israel.
In the first month, in the first day of the month, thou shall take a young bullock without blemish, and thou shall cleanse the sanctuary.
And the priest shall take of the blood of the sin offering, and put it upon the door-posts of the house, and upon the four corners of the ledge of the altar, and upon the posts of the gate of the inner court.
And so thou shall do on the seventh day of the month for each one who errs, and for him who is simple. So shall ye make atonement for the house.
In the first month, in the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall have the Passover, a feast of seven days. Unleavened bread shall be eaten.
And upon that day the ruler shall prepare for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock for a sin offering.
And the seven days of the feast he shall prepare a burnt offering to Jehovah, seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily the seven days, and a he-goat daily for a sin offering.
And he shall prepare a meal offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and a hin of oil to an ephah.
In the seventh month, in the fifteenth day of the month, in the feast, he shall do the like the seven days, according to the sin offering, according to the burnt offering, and according to the meal offering, and according to the oil.

The gate of the inner court that looks toward the east shall be shut the six working days, but on the sabbath day it shall be opened, and on the day of the new moon it shall be opened.
And the ruler shall enter by the way of the porch of the gate outside, and shall stand by the post of the gate. And the priests shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate. Then he shall go forth, but the gate shall not be shut until the evening.
And the people of the land shall worship at the door of that gate before Jehovah on the sabbaths and on the new moons.
And the burnt offering that the ruler shall offer to Jehovah shall be on the sabbath day six lambs without blemish and a ram without blemish,
and the meal offering shall be an ephah for the ram, and the meal offering for the lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.
And on the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock without blemish, and six lambs, and a ram. They shall be without blemish.
And he shall prepare a meal offering, an ephah for the bullock, and an ephah for the ram, and for the lambs according as he is able, and a hin of oil to an ephah.
And when the ruler shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch of the gate, and he shall go forth by the way of it.
But when the people of the land shall come before Jehovah in the appointed feasts, he who enters by the way of the north gate to worship shall go forth by the way of the south gate, and he who enters by the way of the south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate. He shall not return by the way of the gate whereby he came in, but shall go forth straight before him.
And the ruler, when they go in, shall go in in the midst of them, and when they go forth, they shall go forth together.
And in the feasts and in the solemnities the meal offering shall be an ephah for a bullock, and an ephah for a ram, and for the lambs as he is able to give, and a hin of oil to an ephah.
And when the ruler shall prepare a freewill offering, a burnt offering or peace offerings as a freewill offering to Jehovah, a man shall open for him the gate that looks toward the east. And he shall prepare his burnt offering and his peace offerings, as he does on the sabbath day. Then he shall go forth, and after his going forth a man shall shut the gate.
And thou shall prepare a lamb a year old without blemish for a burnt offering to Jehovah daily. Thou shall prepare it morning by morning.
And thou shall prepare a meal offering with it morning by morning, the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of a hin of oil, to moisten the fine flour, a meal offering to Jehovah continually by a perpetual ordinance.
Thus they shall prepare the lamb, and the meal offering, and the oil, morning by morning, for a continual burnt offering.
If the ruler gives a gift to any of his sons, it is his inheritance. It shall belong to his sons. It is their possession by inheritance.
But if he gives a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants, it shall be his to the year of liberty, then it shall return to the ruler. But as for his inheritance, it shall be for his sons.
Moreover the ruler shall not take of the people's inheritance, to thrust them out of their possession. He shall give inheritance to his sons out of his own possession, that my people be not scattered each man from his possession.
Then he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of the gate, into the holy chambers for the priests, which looked toward the north. And, behold, there was a place on the rear part westward.
And he said to me, This is the place where the priests shall boil the trespass offering and the sin offering, and where they shall bake the meal offering, that they not bring them forth into the outer court, to sanctify the people.
Then he brought me forth into the outer court, and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court. And, behold, in every corner of the court there was a court.
In the four corners of the court there were courts enclosed, forty long and thirty broad. These four in the corners were of one measure.
And there was a wall round about in them, round about the four. And boiling-places were made under the walls round about.
Then said he to me, These are the boiling-houses, where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people.

And he brought me back to the door of the house. And, behold, waters issued out from under the threshold of the house eastward, for the forefront of the house was toward the east. And the waters came down from under, from the right side of the house, on the south of the altar.
Then he brought me out by the way of the gate northward, and led me round by the way outside to the outer gate, by the way of the gate that looks toward the east. And, behold, waters ran out on the right side.
When the man went forth eastward with the line in his hand, he measured a thousand cubits, and he caused me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the ankles.
Again he measured a thousand, and caused me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the knees. Again he measured a thousand, and caused me to pass through the waters, waters that were to the loins.
Afterward he measured a thousand, and it was a river that I could not pass through, for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that could not be passed through.
And he said to me, Son of man, have thou seen this? Then he brought me, and caused me to return to the bank of the river.
Now when I had returned, behold, upon the bank of the river were very many trees on the one side and on the other.
Then he said to me, These waters issue forth toward the eastern region, and shall go down into the Arabah. And they shall go toward the sea, into the sea which were made to issue forth, and the waters shall be healed.
And it shall come to pass, that every living creature which swarms, in every place where the rivers come, shall live. And there shall be a very great multitude of fish (for these waters have come there) and shall be healed. And everything shall live wherever the river comes.
And it shall come to pass, that fishermen shall stand by it. From En-gedi even to En-eglaim shall be a place for the spreading of nets. Their fish shall be according to their kinds, as the fish of the great sea, very many.
But the miry places of it, and the marshes of it, shall not be healed. They shall be given up to salt.
And by the river upon the bank of it, on this side and on that side, shall grow every tree for food, whose leaf shall not wither, nor shall the fruit of it fail. It shall bring forth new fruit every month, because the waters of it issue out of the sanctuary. And the fruit of it shall be for food, and the leaf of it for healing.
This shall be the border by which ye shall divide the land for inheritance according to the twelve tribes of Israel. Joseph shall have two portions.
And ye shall inherit it, one as well as another, for I swore to give it to your fathers. And this land shall fall to you for inheritance.
On the north side, from the great sea, by the way of Hethlon, to the entrance of Zedad,
Hamath, Berothah, Sibraim, which is between the border of Damascus and the border of Hamath, Hazer-hatticon, which is by the border of Hauran.
And the border from the sea, shall be Hazar-enon at the border of Damascus, and on the north northward is the border of Hamath. This is the north side.
And the east side, between Hauran and Damascus and Gilead, and the land of Israel, shall be the Jordan, from the north border to the east sea ye shall measure. This is the east side.
And the south side southward shall be from Tamar as far as the waters of Meriboth-kadesh, to the brook of Egypt, to the great sea. This is the south side southward.
And the west side shall be the great sea, from the south border as far as opposite the entrance of Hamath. This is the west side.
So ye shall divide this land to you according to the tribes of Israel.
And it shall come to pass, that ye shall divide it by lot for an inheritance to you and to the strangers who sojourn among you, who shall beget sons among you. And they shall be to you as the home-born among the sons of Israel; they shall have inheritance with you among the tribes of Israel.
And it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger sojourns, there ye shall give him his inheritance, says the lord Jehovah.

From the north end, beside the way of Hethlon to the entrance of Hamath, Hazar-enan at the border of Damascus, northward beside Hamath, (and they shall have their sides east and west), Dan, one portion.
And by the border of Dan, from the east side to the west side, Asher, one portion.
And by the border of Asher, from the east side even to the west side, Naphtali, one portion.
And by the border of Naphtali, from the east side to the west side, Manasseh, one portion.
And by the border of Manasseh, from the east side to the west side, Ephraim, one portion.
And by the border of Ephraim, from the east side even to the west side, Reuben, one portion.
And by the border of Reuben, from the east side to the west side, Judah, one portion.
twenty-five thousand measures in breadth, and in length as one of the portions, from the east side to the west side. And the sanctuary shall be in the midst of it.
The oblation that ye shall offer to Jehovah shall be twenty-five thousand measures in length, and ten thousand in breadth.
toward the north twenty-five thousand in length, and toward the west ten thousand in breadth, and toward the east ten thousand in breadth, and toward the south twenty-five thousand in length. And the sanctuary of Jehovah shall be in the midst of it.
It shall be for the priests who are sanctified of the sons of Zadok, who have kept my charge, who did not go astray when the sons of Israel went astray, as the Levites went astray.
And it shall be to them an oblation from the oblation of the land, a thing most holy, by the border of the Levites.
And answerable to the border of the priests, the Levites shall have twenty-five thousand in length, and ten thousand in breadth. All the length shall be twenty-five thousand, and the breadth ten thousand.
And they shall sell none of it, nor exchange it, nor shall the first-fruits of the land be alienated, for it is holy to Jehovah.
And the five thousand that are left in the breadth, in front of the twenty-five thousand, shall be for common use, for the city, for dwelling and for suburbs. And the city shall be in the midst of it.
the north side four thousand and five hundred, and the south side four thousand and five hundred, and on the east side four thousand and five hundred, and the west side four thousand and five hundred.
toward the north two hundred and fifty, and toward the south two hundred and fifty, and toward the east two hundred and fifty, and toward the west two hundred and fifty.
And the residue in the length, answerable to the holy oblation, shall be ten thousand eastward, and ten thousand westward. And it shall be answerable to the holy oblation. And the increase of it shall be for food to those who labor in the city.
And those who labor in the city, out of all the tribes of Israel, shall till it.
All the oblation shall be twenty-five thousand by twenty-five thousand. Ye shall offer the holy oblation four-square, with the possession of the city.
And the residue shall be for the ruler, on the one side and on the other of the holy oblation and of the possession of the city, in front of the twenty-five thousand of the oblation toward the east border, and westward in front of the twenty-five thousand toward the west border, answerable to the portions. It shall be for the ruler. And the holy oblation and the sanctuary of the house shall be in the midst of it.
Moreover from the possession of the Levites, and from the possession of the city, being in the midst of that which is the ruler's, between the border of Judah and the border of Benjamin, it shall be for the ruler.
And as for the rest of the tribes, from the east side to the west side, Benjamin, one portion.
And by the border of Benjamin, from the east side to the west side, Simeon, one portion.
And by the border of Simeon, from the east side to the west side, Issachar, one portion.
And by the border of Issachar, from the east side to the west side, Zebulun, one portion.
And by the border of Zebulun, from the east side to the west side, Gad, one portion.
And by the border of Gad, at the south side southward, the border shall be even from Tamar to the waters of Meribath-kadesh, to the brook of Egypt, to the great sea.
This is the land which ye shall divide by lot to the tribes of Israel for inheritance, and these are their several portions, says the lord Jehovah.
On the north side four thousand and five hundred measures by measure.
the gate of Reuben, one, the gate of Judah, one, the gate of Levi, one.
even the gate of Joseph, one, the gate of Benjamin, one, the gate of Dan, one.
the gate of Simeon, one, the gate of Issachar, one, the gate of Zebulun, one.
the gate of Gad, one, the gate of Asher, one, the gate of Naphtali, one.
It shall be eighteen thousand measures round about. And the name of the city from that day shall be, Jehovah is there.

Daniel

In the third year of the reign of Jehoiakim king of Judah, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon came to Jerusalem, and besieged it.
And the Lord gave Jehoiakim king of Judah into his hand, with part of the vessels of the house of God. And he carried them into the land of Shinar to the house of his god, and he brought the vessels into the treasure-house of his god.
And the king spoke to Ashpenaz the master of his eunuchs, that he should bring in certain of the sons of Israel, even of the seed royal and of the ranking men,
youths in whom was no blemish, but well-favored, and skilful in all wisdom, and endued with knowledge, and understanding science, and such as had ability to stand in the king's palace. And that he should teach them the learning and the tongue of the Chaldeans.
And the king appointed for them a daily portion of the king's food, and of the wine which he drank. And that they should be nourished three years, that at the end of it they should stand before the king.
Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah.
And the ruler of the eunuchs gave names to them. To Daniel he gave the name of Belteshazzar, and to Hananiah, of Shadrach, and to Mishael, of Meshach, and to Azariah, of Abednego.
But Daniel purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the king's food, nor with the wine which he drank. Therefore he requested of the ruler of the eunuchs that he might not defile himself.
Now God made Daniel find kindness and compassion in the sight of the ruler of the eunuchs.
And the ruler of the eunuchs said to Daniel, I fear my lord the king, who has appointed your food and your drink. For why should he see your faces worse looking than the youths that are of your own age? So ye would endanger my head with the king.
Then Daniel said to the steward whom the ruler of the eunuchs had appointed over Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah,
Test thy servants, I beseech thee, ten days, and let them give us vegetables to eat, and water to drink.
Then let our countenances be looked upon before thee, and the countenance of the youths that eat of the king's food. And as thou see, deal with thy servants.
So he hearkened to them in this matter, and tested them ten days.
And at the end of ten days their countenances appeared finer, and they were fuller in flesh, than all the youths who ate of the king's dainties.
So the steward took away their food, and the wine that they should drink, and gave them vegetables.
Now as for these four youths, God gave them knowledge and skill in all learning and wisdom. And Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.
And at the end of the days which the king had appointed for bringing them in, the ruler of the eunuchs brought them in before Nebuchadnezzar.
And the king conversed with them. And among them all none was found like Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah. Therefore they stood before the king.
And in every matter of wisdom and understanding, concerning which the king inquired of them, he found them ten times better than all the magicians and enchanters who were in all his realm.
And Daniel continued even to the first year of king Cyrus.

And in the second year of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, Nebuchadnezzar dreamed dreams. And his spirit was troubled, and his sleep went from him.
Then the king commanded to call the magicians, and the enchanters, and the sorcerers, and the Chaldeans, to tell the king his dreams. So they came in and stood before the king.
And the king said to them, I have dreamed a dream, and my spirit is troubled to know the dream.
Then the Chaldeans spoke to the king in the Syrian language, O king, live forever. Tell thy servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation.
The king answered and said to the Chaldeans, The thing is gone from me. If ye do not make the dream and the interpretation of it known to me, ye shall be cut in pieces, and your houses shall be made a dunghill.
But if ye show the dream and the interpretation of it, ye shall receive gifts and rewards and great honor from me. Therefore show the dream and the interpretation of it to me.
They answered the second time and said, Let the king tell his servants the dream, and we will show the interpretation.
The king answered and said, I know of a certainty that ye would gain time, because ye see the thing has gone from me.
But if ye do not make known to me the dream, there is but one law for you, for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words to speak before me till the time is changed. Therefore tell me the dream, and I shall know that ye can show me the interpretation of it.
The Chaldeans answered before the king, and said, There is not a man upon the earth who can show the king's matter. Inasmuch as no king, lord, or ruler, has asked such a thing of any magician or enchanter or Chaldean.
And it is a rare thing that the king requires, and there is no other who can show it before the king, except the gods, whose dwelling is not with flesh.
For this reason the king was angry and very furious, and commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
So the decree went forth, and the wise men were to be slain. And they sought Daniel and his companions to be slain.
Then Daniel returned answer with counsel and prudence to Arioch, the captain of the king's guard, who went forth to kill the wise men of Babylon.
He answered and said to Arioch the king's captain, Why is the decree so urgent from the king? Then Arioch made the thing known to Daniel.
And Daniel went in, and desired of the king that he would appoint him a time, and he would show the king the interpretation.
Then Daniel went to his house, and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions,
that they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret, that Daniel and his companions should nor perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.
Then the secret was shown to Daniel in a vision of the night. Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God forever and ever, for wisdom and might are his.
And he changes the times and the seasons. He removes kings, and sets up kings. He gives wisdom to the wise, and knowledge to those who have understanding.
He reveals the deep and secret things. He knows what is in the darkness, and the light dwells with him.
I thank thee, and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who has given me wisdom and might, and has now made known to me what we desired of thee, for thou have made known to us the king's matter.
Do not destroy the wise men of Babylon. Bring me in before the king, and I will show to the king the interpretation.
I have found a man of the sons of the captivity of Judah, who will make known the interpretation to the king.
The king answered and said to Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, Are thou able to make known to me the dream which I have seen, and the interpretation of it?
Daniel answered before the king, and said, The secret which the king has demanded, neither wise men, enchanters, magicians, nor soothsayers, can show to the king,
As for thee, O king, thy thoughts came upon thy bed, what should come to pass hereafter. And he who reveals secrets has made known to thee what shall come to pass.
But as for me, this secret is not revealed to me for any wisdom that I have more than any living man, but to the intent that the interpretation may be made known to the king, and that thou may know the thoughts of thy heart.
Thou, O king, saw, and, behold, a great image. This image, which was mighty, and whose brightness was excellent, stood before thee, and the appearance of it was fearful.
As for this image, its head was of fine gold, its breast and its arms of silver, its belly and its thighs of brass,
its legs of iron, its feet part of iron, and part of clay.
Thou looked until a stone was cut out without hands, which smote the image upon its feet that were of iron and clay, and broke them in pieces.
Then the iron, the clay, the brass, the silver, and the gold, was broken in pieces together, and became like the chaff of the summer threshing floors. And the wind carried them away, so that no place was found for them. And the stone that smote the image became a great mountain, and filled the whole earth.
This is the dream, and we will tell the interpretation of it before the king.
Thou, O king, are a king of kings, to whom the God of heaven has given the kingdom, the power, and the strength, and the glory.
And wherever the sons of men dwell, the beasts of the field and the birds of the heavens, he has given into thy hand, and has made thee to rule over them all. Thou are the head of gold.
And after thee shall arise another kingdom inferior to thee, and another third kingdom of brass, which shall bear rule over all the earth.
And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron, inasmuch as iron breaks in pieces and subdues all things. And as iron that crushes all these, it shall break in pieces and crush.
And whereas thou saw the feet and toes, part of potters' clay, and part of iron, it shall be a divided kingdom. But there shall be of the strength of the iron in it, inasmuch as thou saw the iron mixed with miry clay.
And as the toes of the feet were part of iron, and part of clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong, and partly broken.
And whereas thou saw the iron mixed with miry clay, they shall mingle themselves with the seed of men, but they shall not cling one to another, even as iron does not mix with clay.
And in the days of those kings the God of heaven shall set up a kingdom that shall never be destroyed, nor shall the sovereignty of it be left to another people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall stand forever.
Inasmuch as thou saw that a stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, and that it broke in pieces the iron, the brass, the clay, the silver, and the gold, the great God has made known to the king what shall come to pass hereafter. And the dream is certain, and the interpretation thereof sure.
Then the king Nebuchadnezzar fell upon his face, and worshiped Daniel, and commanded that they should offer an oblation and sweet odors to him.
The king answered to Daniel, and said, Of a truth your God is the God of gods, and Lord of kings, and a revealer of secrets, since thou have been able to reveal this secret.
Then the king made Daniel great, and gave him many great gifts, and made him to rule over the whole province of Babylon, and to be chief governor over all the wise men of Babylon.
And Daniel requested of the king, and he appointed Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, over the affairs of the province of Babylon, but Daniel was in the gate of the king.

Nebuchadnezzar the king made an image of gold, whose height was sixty cubits, and the breadth of it six cubits. He set it up in the plain of Dura, in the province of Babylon.
Then Nebuchadnezzar the king sent to gather together the satraps, the deputies, and the governors, the judges, the treasurers, the counselors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, to come to the dedication of the image which Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
Then the satraps, the deputies, and the governors, the judges, the treasurers, the counselors, the sheriffs, and all the rulers of the provinces, were gathered together to the dedication of the image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up, and they stood before the image that Nebuchadnezzar had set up.
Then the herald cried aloud, To you it is commanded, O peoples, nations, and languages,
that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, dulcimer, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king has set up.
And he who does not fall down and worship shall the same hour be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
Therefore at that time, when all the peoples heard the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and all kinds of music, all the peoples, the nations, and the languages, fell down and worshiped the golden image that Nebuchadnezzar the king had set up.
Therefore at that time certain Chaldeans came near, and brought accusation against the Jews.
They answered and said to Nebuchadnezzar the king, O king, live forever.
Thou, O king, have made a decree, that every man who shall hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of music, shall fall down and worship the golden image.
And he who does not fall down and worship, shall be cast into the midst of a burning fiery furnace.
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. These men, O king, have not regarded thee. They do not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set up.
Then Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Then they brought these men before the king.
Nebuchadnezzar answered and said to them, Is it of purpose, O Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, that ye do not serve my god, nor worship the golden image which I have set up?
Now if ye be ready that at what time ye hear the sound of the cornet, flute, harp, sackbut, psaltery, and dulcimer, and all kinds of music, ye fall down and worship the image which I have made, well. But if ye do not worship, ye shall be cast the same hour into the midst of a burning fiery furnace. And who is that god who shall deliver you out of my hands?
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego answered and said to the king, O Nebuchadnezzar, we have no need to answer thee in this matter.
If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand, O king.
But if not, be it known to thee, O king, that we will not serve thy gods, nor worship the golden image which thou have set up.
Then Nebuchadnezzar was full of fury, and the form of his visage was changed against Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Therefore he spoke, and commanded that they should heat the furnace seven times more than it was accustomed to be heated.
And he commanded certain mighty men who were in his army to bind Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, and to cast them into the burning fiery furnace.
Then these men were bound in their coats, their tunics, and their head coverings, and their other garments, and were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
Therefore because the king's commandment was urgent, and the furnace very hot, the flame of the fire killed those men who took up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego.
And these three men, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace.
Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonished, and rose up in haste. He spoke and said to his counselors, Did we not cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said to the king, True, O king.
He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no harm. And the appearance of the fourth is like a son of the gods.
Then Nebuchadnezzar came near to the mouth of the burning fiery furnace. He spoke and said, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, ye servants of the Most High God, come forth, and come here. Then Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego came forth out of the midst of the fire.
And the satraps, the deputies, and the governors, and the king's counselors, being gathered together, saw these men, that the fire had no power upon their bodies, nor was the hair of their head singed. Neither were their coats changed, nor had the smell of fire passed on them.
Nebuchadnezzar spoke and said, Blessed be the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, who has sent his agent, and delivered his servants who trusted in him, and have changed the king's word, and have yielded their bodies, that they might not serve nor worship any god, except their own God.
Therefore I make a decree, that every people, nation, and language, which speaks anything amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill, because there is no other god who is able to deliver after this sort.
Then the king promoted Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego in the province of Babylon.

Peace be multiplied to you.
It has seemed good to me to show the signs and wonders that the Most High God has wrought toward me.
How great are his signs, and how mighty are his wonders! His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and his dominion is from generation to generation.
I, Nebuchadnezzar, was at rest in my house, and flourishing in my palace.
I saw a dream which made me afraid, and the thoughts upon my bed and the visions of my head troubled me.
Therefore I made a decree to bring in all the wise men of Babylon before me, that they might make known to me the interpretation of the dream.
Then the magicians, the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers came in, and I told the dream before them, but they did not make the interpretation of it known to me.
But at the last Daniel came in before me, whose name was Belteshazzar, according to the name of my god, and in whom is the spirit of the holy gods. And I told the dream before him, saying,
O Belteshazzar, master of the magicians, because I know that the spirit of the holy gods is in thee, and no secret troubles thee, tell me the visions of my dream that I have seen, and the interpretation thereof.
I saw, and, behold, a tree in the midst of the earth, and the height of it was great.
The tree grew, and was strong, and the height of it reached to heaven, and the sight of it to the end of all the earth.
The leaves of it were fine, and the fruit of it much, and food was in it for all. The beasts of the field had shadow under it, and the birds of the heavens dwelt in the branches of it. And all flesh was fed from it.
I saw in the visions of my head upon my bed, and, behold, a watcher and a holy one came down from heaven.
He cried aloud, and said thus, Hew down the tree, and cut off its branches. Shake off its leaves, and scatter its fruit. Let the beasts get away from under it, and the fowls from its branches.
Nevertheless leave the stump of its roots in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field. And let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts in the grass of the earth.
Let his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be given to him. And let seven times pass over him.
The sentence is by the decree of the watchers, and the demand by the word of the holy ones, to the intent that the living may know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomever he will, and sets up over it the lowest of men.
This dream I, king Nebuchadnezzar, have seen. And thou, O Belteshazzar, declare the interpretation, inasmuch as all the wise men of my kingdom are not able to make known to me the interpretation. But thou are able, for the spirit of the holy gods is in thee.
Then Daniel, whose name was Belteshazzar, was stricken mute for a while, and his thoughts troubled him. The king answered and said, Belteshazzar, let not the dream, or the interpretation, trouble thee. Belteshazzar answered and said, My lord, may the dream be to those who hate thee, and the interpretation of it to thine adversaries.
The tree that thou saw, which grew, and was strong, whose height reached to heaven, and the sight of it to all the earth,
whose leaves were fine, and the fruit of it much, and in it was food for all, under which the beasts of the field dwelt, and upon whose branches the birds of the heavens had their habitation,
it is thou, O king, who have grown and become strong. For thy greatness has grown, and reaches to heaven, and thy dominion to the end of the earth.
And whereas the king saw a watcher and a holy one coming down from heaven, and saying, Hew down the tree, and destroy it. Nevertheless leave the stump of the roots of it in the earth, even with a band of iron and brass, in the tender grass of the field. And let it be wet with the dew of heaven, and let his portion be with the beasts of the field, till seven times pass over him;
That thou shall be driven from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field. And thou shall be made to eat grass as oxen, and shall be wet with the dew of heaven. And seven times shall pass over thee till thou know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomever he will.
And whereas they commanded to leave the stump of the roots of the tree, thy kingdom shall be sure to thee, after thou shall have known that the heavens do rule.
Therefore, O king, let my counsel be acceptable to thee, and break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by showing mercy to the poor, if there may be a lengthening of thy tranquility.
All this came upon the king Nebuchadnezzar.
At the end of twelve months he was walking in the royal palace of Babylon.
The king spoke and said, Is not this great Babylon, which I have built for the royal dwelling-place by the might of my power and for the glory of my majesty?
The kingdom is departed from thee.
And thou shall be driven from men, and thy dwelling shall be with the beasts of the field. Thou shall be made to eat grass as oxen, and seven times shall pass over thee, until thou know that the Most High rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomever he will.
The same hour the thing was fulfilled upon Nebuchadnezzar. And he was driven from men, and ate grass as oxen. And his body was wet with the dew of heaven, till his hair was grown like eagles' feathers, and his nails like birds' claws.
And at the end of the days I, Nebuchadnezzar, lifted up my eyes to heaven, and my understanding returned to me. And I blessed the Most High, and I praised and honored him who lives forever. For his dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom from generation to generation.
And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing, and he does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the earth. And none can stay his hand, or say to him, What are thou doing?
At the same time my understanding returned to me, and for the glory of my kingdom, my majesty and brightness returned to me, and my counselors and my lords sought to me. And I was established in my kingdom, and excellent greatness was added to me.
Now I, Nebuchadnezzar, praise and extol and honor the King of heaven, for all his works are truth, and his ways justice. And he is able to abase those who walk in pride.

Belshazzar the king made a great feast for a thousand of his lords, and drank wine before the thousand.
Belshazzar, while he tasted the wine, commanded to bring the golden and silver vessels which Nebuchadnezzar his father had taken out of the temple which was in Jerusalem, that the king and his lords, his wives and his concubines, might drink from there.
Then they brought the golden vessels that were taken out of the temple of the house of God which was at Jerusalem. And the king and his lords, his wives and his concubines, drank from them.
They drank wine, and praised the gods of gold, and of silver, of brass, of iron, of wood, and of stone.
In the same hour the fingers of a man's hand came forth, and wrote opposite the lampstand upon the plaster of the wall of the king's palace. And the king saw the part of the hand that wrote.
Then the king's countenance was changed in him, and his thoughts troubled him. And the joints of his loins were loosed, and his knees smote one against another.
The king cried aloud to bring in the enchanters, the Chaldeans, and the soothsayers. The king spoke and said to the wise men of Babylon, Whoever shall read this writing, and show me the interpretation of it, shall be clothed with purple, and have a chain of gold about his neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.
Then all the king's wise men came in, but they could not read the writing, nor make known to the king the interpretation.
Then king Belshazzar was greatly troubled, and his countenance was changed in him, and his lords were perplexed.
Now the queen came into the banquet house because of the words of the king and his lords. The queen spoke and said, O king, live forever. Let not thy thoughts trouble thee, nor let thy countenance be changed.
There is a man in thy kingdom, in whom is the spirit of the holy gods. And in the days of thy father light and understanding and wisdom, like the wisdom of the gods, were found in him. And the king Nebuchadnezzar thy father, the king, I say, thy father, made him master of the magicians, enchanters, Chaldeans, and soothsayers,
inasmuch as an excellent spirit, and knowledge, and understanding, interpreting of dreams, and showing of dark sentences, and dissolving of doubts, were found in the same Daniel, whom the king named Belteshazzar. Now let Daniel be called, and he will show the interpretation.
Then Daniel was brought in before the king. The king spoke and said to Daniel, Are thou that Daniel, who are of the sons of the captivity of Judah, whom my father the king brought out of Judah?
I have heard of thee, that the spirit of the gods is in thee, and that light and understanding and excellent wisdom are found in thee.
And now the wise men, the enchanters, have been brought in before me, that they should read this writing, and make known to me the interpretation of it, but they could not show the interpretation of the thing.
But I have heard of thee, that thou can give interpretations, and dissolve doubts. Now if thou can read the writing, and make known to me the interpretation of it, thou shall be clothed with purple, and have a chain of gold about thy neck, and shall be the third ruler in the kingdom.
Then Daniel answered and said before the king, Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another. Nevertheless I will read the writing to the king, and make known to him the interpretation.
O thou king, the Most High God gave Nebuchadnezzar thy father the kingdom and greatness and glory and majesty.
And because of the greatness that he gave him, all the peoples, nations, and languages trembled and feared before him. Whom he wanted, he killed, and whom he wanted, he kept alive, and whom he wanted, he raised up, and whom he wanted, he put down.
But when his heart was lifted up, and his spirit was hardened so that he dealt proudly, he was deposed from his kingly throne. And they took his glory from him,
and he was driven from the sons of men. And his heart was made like the beasts, and his dwelling was with the wild donkeys. He was fed with grass like oxen, and his body was wet with the dew of heaven, until he knew that the Most High God rules in the kingdom of men, and that he sets up over it whomever he will.
And thou his son, O Belshazzar, have not humbled thy heart, though thou knew all this,
but have lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven. And they have brought the vessels of his house before thee, and thou and thy lords, thy wives and thy concubines, have drunk wine from them. And thou have praised the gods of silver and gold, of brass, iron, wood, and stone, which neither see, nor hear, nor know. And the God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, thou have not glorified.
Then the part of the hand was sent from before him, and this writing was inscribed.
MENE, MENE, TEKEL, UPHARSIN.
MENE, God has numbered thy kingdom, and brought it to an end.
TEKEL, thou are weighed in the balances, and are found wanting.
PERES, thy kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians.
Then Belshazzar commanded, and they clothed Daniel with purple, and put a chain of gold about his neck, and made proclamation concerning him, that he should be the third ruler in the kingdom.
In that night Belshazzar the Chaldean King was slain.
And Darius the Mede received the kingdom, being about sixty-two years old.

It pleased Darius to set over the kingdom a hundred and twenty satraps, who should be throughout the whole kingdom,
and over them three presidents, of whom Daniel was one, that these satraps might give account to them, and that the king should have no damage.
Then this Daniel was distinguished above the presidents and the satraps, because an excellent spirit was in him, and the king thought to set him over the whole realm.
Then the presidents and the satraps sought to find occasion against Daniel concerning the kingdom, but they could find no occasion nor fault, inasmuch as he was faithful, nor was there any error or fault found in him.
Then these men said, We shall not find any occasion against this Daniel unless we find it against him concerning the law of his God.
King Darius, live forever.
All the presidents of the kingdom, the deputies and the satraps, the counselors and the governors, have consulted together to establish a royal statute, and to make a strong interdict, that whoever shall ask a petition of any god or man for thirty days, except of thee, O king, he shall be cast into the den of lions.
Now, O king, establish the interdict, and sign the writing, that it be not changed, according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which does not alter.
Therefore king Darius signed the writing and the interdict.
And when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went into his house (now his windows were open in his chamber toward Jerusalem) and he knelt upon his knees three times a day, and prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did formerly.
Then these men assembled together, and found Daniel making petition and supplication before his God.
Then they came near, and spoke before the king concerning the king's interdict. Have thou not signed an interdict, that every man who shall make petition to any god or man within thirty days, except to thee, O king, shall be cast into the den of lions? The king answered and said, The thing is true according to the law of the Medes and Persians, which does not alter.
Then they answered and said before the king, That Daniel, who is of the sons of the captivity of Judah, does not regard thee, O king, nor the interdict that thou have signed, but makes his petition three times a day.
Then the king, when he heard these words, was very displeased, and set his heart on Daniel to deliver him. And he labored till the going down of the sun to rescue him.
Then these men assembled together to the king, and said to the king, Know, O king, that it is a law of the Medes and Persians, that no interdict nor statute which the king establishes may be changed.
Then the king commanded, and they brought Daniel, and cast him into the den of lions. Now the king spoke and said to Daniel, Thy God whom thou serve continually, he will deliver thee.
And a stone was brought, and laid upon the mouth of the den. And the king sealed it with his own signet, and with the signet of his lords, that nothing might be changed concerning Daniel.
Then the king went to his palace, and passed the night fasting, nor were instruments of music brought before him. And his sleep fled from him.
Then the king arose very early in the morning, and went in haste to the den of lions.
And when he came near to the den to Daniel, he cried with a lamentable voice. The king spoke and said to Daniel, O Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God, whom thou serve continually, able to deliver thee from the lions?
Then Daniel said to the king, O king, live forever.
My God has sent his agent, and has shut the lions' mouths, and they have not hurt me, inasmuch as before him innocence was found in me. And also before thee, O king, I have done no harm.
Then the king was exceedingly glad, and commanded that they should take Daniel up out of the den. So Daniel was taken up out of the den, and no manner of harm was found upon him, because he had trusted in his God.
And the king commanded, and they brought those men who had accused Daniel, and they cast them into the den of lions, them, their sons, and their wives. And the lions had the mastery of them, and broke all their bones in pieces, before they came to the bottom of the den.
Peace be multiplied to you.
I make a decree, that in all the dominion of my kingdom men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel, for he is the living God, and steadfast forever. And his kingdom is that which shall not be destroyed, and his dominion shall be even to the end.
He delivers and rescues, and he works signs and wonders in heaven and in earth, who has delivered Daniel from the power of the lions.
So this Daniel prospered in the reign of Darius, and in the reign of Cyrus the Persian.

In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon, Daniel had a dream and visions of his head upon his bed. Then he wrote the dream and told the sum of the matters.
Daniel spoke and said, I saw in my vision by night, and, behold, the four winds of heaven broke forth upon the great sea.
And four great beasts came up from the sea, different one from another.
The first was like a lion, and had eagle's wings. I beheld till the wings of it were plucked, and it was lifted up from the earth, and made to stand upon two feet as a man, and a man's heart was given to it.
Arise, devour much flesh.
After this I beheld, and, lo, another, like a leopard, which had upon its back four wings of a bird. The beast also had four heads, and dominion was given to it.
After this I saw in the night visions, and, behold, a fourth beast, fearful and powerful, and exceedingly strong. And it had great iron teeth. It devoured and broke in pieces, and stamped the residue with its feet. And it was different from all the beasts that were before it, and it had ten horns.
I considered the horns, and, behold, there came up among them another horn, a little one, before which three of the first horns were plucked up by the roots. And, behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man, and a mouth speaking great things.
I beheld till thrones were placed, and one who was ancient of days sat. His raiment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool. His throne was fiery flames, and the wheels of it burning fire.
A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him. Thousands of thousands ministered to him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him. The judgment was set, and the books were opened.
I beheld at that time because of the voice of the great words which the horn spoke. I beheld even till the beast was slain, and its body destroyed, and it was given to be burned with fire.
And as for the rest of the beasts, their dominion was taken away. Yet their lives were prolonged for a season and a time.
I saw in the night visions, and, behold, there came with the clouds of heaven someone like a son of man. And he came even to the ancient of days, and they brought him near before him.
And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all the peoples, nations, and languages should serve him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed.
As for me, Daniel, my spirit was grieved in the midst of my body, and the visions of my head troubled me.
I came near to one of those who stood by, and asked him the truth concerning all this. So he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things.
These great beasts, which are four, are four kings who shall arise out of the earth.
But the sanctified of the Most High shall receive the kingdom, and possess the kingdom forever, even forever and ever.
Then I desired to know the truth concerning the fourth beast, which was different from all of them, exceedingly fearful, whose teeth were of iron, and its nails of brass, which devoured, broke in pieces, and stamped the residue with its feet,
and concerning the ten horns that were on its head, and the other horn which came up, and before which three fell, even that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spoke great things, whose look was greater than its fellows.
I beheld, and the same horn made war with the sanctified, and prevailed against them
until the ancient of days came. And judgment was given to the sanctified of the Most High, and the time came that the sanctified possessed the kingdom.
Thus he said, The fourth beast shall be a fourth kingdom upon earth, which shall be different from all the kingdoms, and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it in pieces.
And as for the ten horns, out of this kingdom ten kings shall arise. And another shall arise after them, and he shall be different from the former. And he shall put down three kings.
And he shall speak words against the Most High, and shall wear out the sanctified of the Most High. And he shall think to change the times and the law, and they shall be given into his hand until a time and times and half a time.
But the judgment shall be set, and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it to the end.
And the kingdom and the dominion, and the greatness of the kingdoms under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the sanctified of the Most High. His kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him.
Here is the end of the matter. As for me, Daniel, my thoughts troubled me much, and my countenance was changed in me, but I kept the matter in my heart.

In the third year of the reign of king Belshazzar a vision appeared to me, even to me, Daniel, after that which appeared to me at the first.
And I saw in the vision, now it was so, that when I saw, I was in Shushan the palace, which is in the province of Elam, and I saw in the vision, and I was by the river Ulai.
Then I lifted up my eyes, and saw, and, behold, there stood before the river a ram which had two horns. And the two horns were high, but one was higher than the other, and the higher came up last.
I saw the ram pushing westward, and northward, and southward, and no beasts could stand before him, nor was there any that could deliver out of his hand, but he did according to his will, and magnified himself.
And as I was considering, behold, a he-goat came from the west over the face of the whole earth, and did not touch the ground. And the goat had a notable horn between his eyes.
And he came to the ram that had the two horns, which I saw standing before the river, and ran upon him in the fury of his power.
And I saw him come close to the ram. And he was moved with anger against him, and smote the ram, and broke his two horns. And there was no power in the ram to stand before him, but he cast him down to the ground, and trampled upon him. And there was none that could deliver the ram out of his hand.
And the he-goat magnified himself exceedingly. And when he was strong, the great horn was broken, and instead of it there came up four notable horns toward the four winds of heaven.
And out of one of them came forth a little horn, which grew exceedingly great, toward the south, and toward the east, and toward the glorious land.
And it grew great, even to the host of heaven. And it cast down some of the host and of the stars to the ground, and trampled upon them.
Yea, it magnified itself, even to the Prince of the host. And it took away from him the continual burnt offering, and the place of his sanctuary was cast down.
And the host was given over to it together with the continual burnt offering through transgression. And it cast down truth to the ground, and it did its pleasure and prospered.
Then I heard a holy one speaking, and another holy one said to that certain one who spoke, How long shall be the vision of the continual burnt offering, and the transgression that make desolate, to give both the sanctuary and the host to be trodden under foot?
And he said to me, To two thousand and three hundred evenings and mornings. Then the sanctuary shall be cleansed.
And it came to pass, when I, even I Daniel, had seen the vision, that I sought to understand it, and, behold, there stood before me someone as the appearance of a man.
And I heard a man's voice between the banks of the Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel, make this man to understand the vision.
So he came near where I stood. And when he came, I was frightened, and fell upon my face. But he said to me, Understand, O son of man, for the vision belongs to the time of the end.
Now as he was speaking with me, I fell into a deep sleep with my face toward the ground, but he touched me, and set me upright.
And he said, Behold, I will make thee know what shall be in the latter time of the indignation, for it belongs to the appointed time of the end.
The ram which thou saw, that had the two horns, they are the kings of Media and Persia.
And the rough he-goat is the king of Greece. And the great horn that is between his eyes is the first king.
And as for that which was broken, in the place of which four stood up, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not with his power.
And in the latter time of their kingdom, when the transgressors have come to the full, a king of fierce countenance, and understanding hidden things, shall stand up.
And his power shall be mighty, but not by his own power, and he shall destroy amazingly, and shall prosper and do his pleasure. And he shall destroy the mighty ones and the holy people.
And through his policy he shall cause deceit to prosper in his hand, and he shall magnify himself in his heart. And he shall destroy many in their security. He shall also stand up against the Prince of princes, but he shall be broken without a hand.
And the vision of the evenings and mornings which has been told is true. But shut thou up the vision, for it belongs to many days to come.
And I, Daniel, fainted, and was sick certain days. Then I rose up, and did the king's business. And I wondered at the vision, but none understood it.

In the first year of Darius the son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans,
in the first year of his reign, I, Daniel, understood by the books the number of the years of which the word of Jehovah came to Jeremiah the prophet, for the accomplishing of the desolations of Jerusalem, even seventy years.
And I set my face to the Lord God, to seek by prayer and supplications, with fasting and sackcloth and ashes.
And I prayed to Jehovah my God, and made confession, and said, Oh, Lord, the great and fearful God, who keeps covenant and loving kindness with those who love him and keep his commandments,
we have sinned, and have dealt perversely, and have done wickedly, and have rebelled, even turning aside from thy precepts and from thine ordinances,
nor have we hearkened to thy servants the prophets, who spoke in thy name to our kings, our rulers, and our fathers, and to all the people of the land.
O Lord, righteousness belongs to thee, but to us confusion of face, as at this day, to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and to all Israel, who are near, and who are far off, through all the countries where thou have driven them, because of their trespass that they have trespassed against thee.
O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face, to our kings, to our rulers, and to our fathers, because we have sinned against thee.
To the Lord our God belong mercies and forgiveness, for we have rebelled against him,
nor have we obeyed the voice of Jehovah our God, to walk in his laws, which he set before us by his servants the prophets.
Yea, all Israel have transgressed thy law, even turning aside, that they should not obey thy voice. Therefore the curse has been poured out upon us, and the oath that is written in the law of Moses the servant of God. For we have sinned against him.
And he has confirmed his words, which he spoke against us, and against our judges who judged us, by bringing upon us a great evil, for under the whole heaven has not been done as has been done upon Jerusalem.
As it is written in the law of Moses, all this evil has come upon us. Yet we have not entreated the favor of Jehovah our God, that we should turn from our iniquities, and have discernment in thy truth.
Therefore Jehovah has watched over the evil, and brought it upon us, for Jehovah our God is righteous in all his works which he does, and we have not obeyed his voice.
And now, O Lord our God, who has brought thy people forth out of the land of Egypt with a mighty hand, and has gotten thee renown, as at this day, we have sinned, we have done wickedly.
O Lord, according to all thy righteousness, let thine anger and thy wrath, I pray thee, be turned away from thy city Jerusalem, thy holy mountain. Because for our sins, and for the iniquities of our fathers, Jerusalem and thy people have become a reproach to all who are round about us.
Now therefore, O our God, hearken to the prayer of thy servant, and to his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that is desolate, for the Lord's sake.
O my God, incline thine ear, and hear. Open thine eyes, and behold our desolations, and the city which is called by thy name. For we do not present our supplications before thee for our righteousness, but for thy great mercies' sake.
O Lord, hear. O Lord, forgive. O Lord, hearken and do. Defer not, for thine own sake, O my God, because thy city and thy people are called by thy name.
And while I was speaking, and praying, and confessing my sin and the sin of my people Israel, and presenting my supplication before Jehovah my God for the holy mountain of my God,
yea, while I was speaking in prayer, the man Gabriel, whom I had seen in the vision at the beginning, being caused to fly swiftly, touched me about the time of the evening oblation.
And he instructed me, and talked with me, and said, O Daniel, I have now come forth to give thee wisdom and understanding.
At the beginning of thy supplications the commandment went forth, and I have come to tell thee, for thou are greatly beloved. Therefore consider the matter, and understand the vision.
Seventy weeks are decreed upon thy people and upon thy holy city, to finish transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness, and to seal up vision and prophecy, and to anoint the most holy.
Know therefore and discern, that from the going forth of the commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem to the anointed one, the Prince, shall be seven weeks, and sixty-two weeks. It shall be built again, with street and moat, even in troublesome times.
And after the sixty-two weeks the anointed one shall be cut off, and shall have nothing. And the people of the prince who shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary, and the end of it shall be with a flood. And even to the end shall be war; desolations are determined.
And he shall make a firm covenant with many for one week. And in the midst of the week he shall cause the sacrifice and the oblation to cease. And upon the wing of abominations shall come one who makes desolate. And even to the full end, and that determined, wrath shall be poured out upon the desolate.

In the third year of Cyrus king of Persia a thing was revealed to Daniel, whose name was called Belteshazzar, and the thing was true, even a great warfare. And he understood the thing, and had understanding of the vision.
In those days I, Daniel, was mourning three whole weeks.
I ate no pleasant bread. Neither flesh nor wine came into my mouth. Neither did I anoint myself at all, till three whole weeks were fulfilled.
And in the twenty-fourth day of the first month, as I was by the side of the great river, which is Hiddekel,
I lifted up my eyes, and looked. And, behold, a man clothed in linen, whose loins were girded with pure gold of Uphaz.
Also his body was like the beryl, and his face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as flaming torches, and his arms and his feet like burnished brass, and the voice of his words like the voice of a multitude.
And I, Daniel, alone saw the vision, for the men who were with me did not see the vision, but a great quaking fell upon them, and they fled to hide themselves.
So I was left alone, and saw this great vision. And there remained no strength in me, for my fitness was turned in me into debility, and I retained no strength.
Yet I heard the voice of his words. And when I heard the voice of his words, then I fell into a deep sleep on my face, with my face toward the ground.
And, behold, a hand touched me, which set me upon my knees and upon the palms of my hands.
And he said to me, O Daniel, thou man greatly beloved, understand the words that I speak to thee, and stand upright, for I am now sent to thee. And when he had spoken this word to me, I stood, trembling.
Then he said to me, Fear not, Daniel, for from the first day that thou set thy heart to understand, and to humble thyself before thy God, thy words were heard. And I have come for thy words' sake.
But the ruler of the kingdom of Persia withstood me twenty-one days, but, lo, Michael, one of the chief princes, came to help me. And I remained there with the kings of Persia.
I have come now to make thee understand what shall befall thy people in the latter days, for the vision is yet for many days.
And when he had spoken to me according to these words, I set my face toward the ground, and was mute.
And, behold, someone in the likeness of the sons of men touched my lips. Then I opened my mouth, and spoke and said to him who stood before me, O my lord, because of the vision my pains have turned upon me, and I retain no strength.
For how can the servant of this my lord talk with this my lord? For as for me, straightaway there remained no strength in me, nor was there breath left in me.
Then someone like the appearance of a man touched me again, and he strengthened me.
And he said, O man greatly beloved, fear not. Peace be to thee. Be strong, yea, be strong. And when he spoke to me, I was strengthened, and said, Let my lord speak, for thou have strengthened me.
Then he said, Do thou know why I have come to thee? And now I will return to fight with the ruler of Persia. And when I go forth, lo, the ruler of Greece shall come.
But I will tell thee that which is inscribed in the writing of truth. And there is none who holds with me against these, but Michael your prince.

And as for me, in the first year of Darius the Mede, I stood up to confirm and strengthen him.
And now I will show thee the truth. Behold, there shall stand up yet three kings in Persia, and the fourth shall be far richer than them all. And when he has grown strong through his riches, he shall stir up all against the realm of Greece.
And a mighty king shall stand up, who shall rule with great dominion, and do according to his will.
And when he shall stand up, his kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven, but not to his posterity, nor according to his dominion with which he ruled, for his kingdom shall be plucked up, even for others besides these.
And the king of the south shall be strong, and one of his rulers. And he shall be powerful over him, and have dominion. His dominion shall be a great dominion.
And at the end of years they shall join themselves together. And the daughter of the king of the south shall come to the king of the north to make an agreement, but she shall not retain the strength of her arm, nor shall he stand, nor his arm. But she shall be given up, and also those who brought her, and he who begot her, and he who strengthened her in those times.
But out of a shoot from her roots shall a man stand up in his place, who shall come to the army, and shall enter into the fortress of the king of the north, and shall deal against them, and shall prevail.
And also their gods, with their molten images, and with their goodly vessels of silver and of gold, he shall carry captive into Egypt, and he shall refrain from the king of the north some years.
And he shall come into the realm of the king of the south, but he shall return into his own land.
And his sons shall war, and shall assemble a multitude of great forces, which shall come on, and overflow, and pass through. And they shall return and war, even to his fortress.
And the king of the south shall be moved with anger, and shall come forth and fight with him, even with the king of the north. And he shall set forth a great multitude, and the multitude shall be given into his hand.
And the multitude shall be lifted up, and his heart shall be exalted. And he shall cast down tens of thousands, but he shall not prevail.
And the king of the north shall return, and shall set forth a multitude greater than the former, and he shall come on at the end of the times, even of years, with a great army and with much substance.
And in those times many shall stand up against the king of the south. Also the sons of the violent among thy people shall lift themselves up to establish the vision, but they shall fall.
So the king of the north shall come, and cast up a mound, and take a well-fortified city. And the forces of the south shall not stand, nor his chosen people. Neither shall there be any strength to stand.
But he who comes against him shall do according to his own will, and none shall stand before him. And he shall stand in the glorious land, and in his hand shall be destruction.
And he shall set his face to come with the strength of his whole kingdom, and with him equitable conditions, and he shall perform them. And he shall give him the daughter of women, to corrupt her, but she shall not stand, nor be for him.
After this he shall turn his face to the isles, and shall take many. But a ruler shall cause the reproach offered by him to cease. Yea, moreover, he shall cause his reproach to turn upon him.
Then he shall turn his face toward the fortresses of his own land, but he shall stumble and fall, and shall not be found.
Then someone shall stand up in his place who shall cause an exactor to pass through the glory of the kingdom, but within a few days he shall be destroyed, neither in anger, nor in battle.
And in his place he who is contemptible shall stand up, to whom they had not given the honor of the kingdom. But he shall come in time of security, and shall obtain the kingdom by flatteries.
And the overwhelming forces shall be overwhelmed from before him, and shall be broken, yea, also the ruler of the covenant.
And after the league made with him, he shall work deceitfully, for he shall come up, and shall become strong, with a small people.
He shall come in time of security even upon the fattest places of the province, and he shall do that which his fathers have not done, nor his fathers' fathers. He shall scatter among them prey, and spoil, and substance. Yea, he shall devise his devices against the strongholds, even for a time.
And he shall stir up his power and his courage against the king of the south with a great army. And the king of the south shall war in battle with a very great and mighty army, but he shall not stand, for they shall devise devices against him.
Yea, those who eat of his food shall destroy him, and his army shall overflow, and many shall fall down slain.
And as for both these kings, their hearts shall be to do mischief, and they shall speak lies at one table. But it shall not prosper, for yet the end shall be at the time appointed.
Then he shall return into his land with great substance. And his heart shall be against the holy covenant, and he shall do his pleasure, and return to his own land.
At the time appointed he shall return, and come into the south, but it shall not be in the latter time as it was in the former.
For ships of Kittim shall come against him. Therefore he shall be grieved, and shall return, and have indignation against the holy covenant, and shall do his pleasure. He shall even return, and have regard to those who forsake the holy covenant.
And forces shall stand on his part, and they shall profane the sanctuary, even the fortress, and shall take away the continual burnt offering, and they shall set up the abomination that makes desolate.
And he shall pervert by flatteries such as do wickedly against the covenant. But the people who know their God shall be strong, and do exploits.
And those who are wise among the people shall instruct many, yet they shall fall by the sword and by flame, by captivity and by spoil, many days.
Now when they shall fall, they shall be helped with a little help, but many shall join themselves to them with flatteries.
And some of those who are wise shall fall, to refine them, and to purify, and to make them white, even to the time of the end, because it is yet for the time appointed.
And the king shall do according to his will. And he shall exalt himself, and magnify himself above every god, and shall speak marvelous things against the God of gods. And he shall prosper till the indignation be accomplished, for that which is determined shall be done.
Neither shall he regard the gods of his fathers, nor the desire of women, nor regard any god, for he shall magnify himself above all.
But in his place he shall honor the god of fortresses. And a god whom his fathers did not know, he shall honor with gold, and silver, and with precious stones, and pleasant things.
And he shall deal with the strongest fortresses by the help of a foreign god. Whoever acknowledges him he will increase with glory, and he shall cause them to rule over many, and shall divide the land for a price.
And at the time of the end, the king of the south shall contend with him, and the king of the north shall come against him like a whirlwind, with chariots, and with horsemen, and with many ships, and he shall enter into the countries, and shall overflow and pass through.
Edom, and Moab, and the chief of the sons of Ammon.
He shall stretch forth his hand also upon the countries, and the land of Egypt shall not escape.
But he shall have power over the treasures of gold and of silver, and over all the precious things of Egypt. And the Libyans and the Ethiopians shall be at his steps.
But news out of the east and out of the north shall trouble him, and he shall go forth with great fury to destroy and to utterly sweep away many.
And he shall plant the tents of his palace between the sea and the glorious holy mountain, yet he shall come to his end, and none shall help him.

And at that time Michael shall stand up, the great prince who stands for the sons of thy people. And there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was a nation even to that same time. And at that time thy people shall be delivered, everyone who shall be found written in the book.
And many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.
And those who are wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and those who turn many to righteousness as the stars forever and ever.
But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words, and seal the book, even to the time of the end. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased.
Then I, Daniel, looked, and, behold, another two stood, the one on the brink of the river on this side, and the other on the brink of the river on that side.
And one said to the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?
And I heard the man clothed in linen, who was above the waters of the river, when he held up his right hand and his left hand to heaven, and swore by him who lives forever that it shall be for a time, times, and a half. And when they have made an end of breaking in pieces the power of the holy people, all these things shall be finished.
And I heard, but I did not understand. Then I said, O my lord, what shall be the outcome of these things?
And he said, Go thy way, Daniel, for the words are shut up and sealed till the time of the end.
Many shall purify themselves, and make themselves white, and be refined, but the wicked shall do wickedly. And none of the wicked shall understand, but those who are wise shall understand.
And from the time that the continual burnt offering shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate is set up, there shall be a thousand and two hundred and ninety days.
Blessed is he who waits, and comes to the thousand three hundred and thirty-five days.
But go thou thy way till the end is. For thou shall rest, and shall stand in thy lot at the end of the days.

Hosea

The word of Jehovah that came to Hosea the son of Beeri, in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel.
When Jehovah spoke at the first by Hosea, Jehovah said to Hosea, Go, take to thee a wife of whoredom and children of whoredom, for the land commits great whoredom, departing from Jehovah.
So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim, and she conceived, and bore him a son.
And Jehovah said to him, Call his name Jezreel, for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the house of Jehu, and will cause the kingdom of the house of Israel to cease.
And it shall come to pass at that day, that I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel.
And she conceived again, and bore a daughter. And Jehovah said to him, Call her name Lo-ruhamah, for I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel, that I should in any way pardon them.
But I will have mercy upon the house of Judah, and will save them by Jehovah their God, and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.
Now when she had weaned Lo-ruhamah, she conceived, and bore a son.
And Jehovah said, Call his name Lo-ammi, for ye are not my people, and I will not be yours.
Yet the number of the sons of Israel shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered. And it shall come to pass that, in the place where it was said to them, Ye are not my people, it shall be said to them, The sons of the living God.
And the sons of Judah and the sons of Israel shall be gathered together, and they shall appoint themselves one head, and shall go up from the land, for great shall be the day of Jezreel.

Say ye to your brothers, Ammi, and to your sisters, Ruhamah.
Contend with your mother. Contend, for she is not my wife, nor am I her husband. And let her put away her whoredoms from her face, and her adulteries from between her breasts,
lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was born, and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry land, and kill her with thirst.
Yea, I will have no mercy upon her sons, for they are sons of whoredom,
for their mother has played the harlot. She who conceived them has done shamefully, for she said, I will go after my lovers, who give me my bread and my water, my wool and my flax, my oil and my drink.
Therefore, behold, I will hedge up thy way with thorns, and I will build a wall against her, that she shall not find her paths.
And she shall follow after her lovers, but she shall not overtake them. And she shall seek them, but shall not find them. Then she shall say, I will go and return to my first husband, for it was better with me then than now.
For she did not know that I gave her the grain, and the new wine, and the oil, and multiplied to her silver and gold, which they used for Baal.
Therefore I will take back my grain in the time of it, and my new wine in the season of it, and will pluck away my wool and my flax which should have covered her nakedness.
And now I will uncover her lewdness in the sight of her lovers, and none shall deliver her out of my hand.
I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feasts, her new moons, and her sabbaths, and all her solemn assemblies.
And I will lay waste her vines and her fig trees, of which she has said, These are my hire that my lovers have given me. And I will make them a forest, and the beasts of the field shall eat them.
And I will visit upon her the days of the Baalim, to which she burned incense when she decked herself with her earrings and her jewels, and went after her lovers, and forgot me, says Jehovah.
Therefore, behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak soothingly to her.
And I will give her her vineyards from there, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope. And she shall make answer there, as in the days of her youth, and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt.
And it shall be at that day, says Jehovah, that thou shall call me Ishi, and shall no more call me Baali.
For I will take away the names of the Baalim out of her mouth, and they shall no more be mentioned by their name.
And in that day I will make a covenant for them with the beasts of the field, and with the birds of the heavens, and with the creeping things of the ground. And I will break the bow and the sword and the battle out of the land, and will make them to lie down safely.
And I will betroth thee to me forever. Yea, I will betroth thee to me in righteousness, and in justice, and in loving kindness, and in mercies.
I will even betroth thee to me in faithfulness, and thou shall know Jehovah.
And it shall come to pass in that day, I will answer, says Jehovah. I will answer the heavens, and they shall answer the earth,
and the earth shall answer the grain, and the new wine, and the oil, and they shall answer Jezreel.
And I will sow her to me in the earth. And I will have mercy upon her who had not obtained mercy. And I will say to those who were not my people, Thou are my people, and they shall say, My God.

And Jehovah said to me, Go again, love a woman beloved of her friend, and an adulteress, even as Jehovah loves the sons of Israel, though they turn to other gods, and love cakes of raisins.
So I bought her to me for fifteen pieces of silver, and a homer of barley, and a half-homer of barley.
And I said to her, Thou shall abide for me many days. Thou shall not play the harlot, and thou shall not be any man's wife. So I will also be toward thee.
For the sons of Israel shall abide many days without king, and without ruler, and without sacrifice, and without pillar, and without ephod or teraphim.
Afterward the sons of Israel shall return and seek Jehovah their God and David their king, and shall come with fear to Jehovah and to his goodness in the latter days.

Hear the word of Jehovah, ye sons of Israel, for Jehovah has a controversy with the inhabitants of the land, because there is no truth, nor goodness, nor knowledge of God in the land.
There is nothing but swearing and breaking faith, and killing, and stealing, and committing adultery. They break out, and blood touches blood.
Therefore the land shall mourn, and everyone who dwells in it shall languish with the beasts of the field and the birds of the heavens. Yea, the fishes of the sea shall also be taken away.
Yet, let no man strive, nor let any man reprove, for thy people are as those who strive with the priest.
And thou shall stumble in the day, and the prophet also shall stumble with thee in the night. And I will destroy thy mother.
My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. Because thou have rejected knowledge, I also will reject thee, that thou shall be no priest to me. Since thou have forgotten the law of thy God, I also will forget thy sons.
As they were multiplied, so they sinned against me. I will change their glory into shame.
They feed on the sin of my people, and set their heart on their iniquity.
And it shall be, like people, like priest. And I will punish them for their ways, and will requite them their doings.
And they shall eat, and not have enough. They shall play the harlot, and shall not increase, because they have left off taking heed to Jehovah.
Whoredom and wine and new wine take away the understanding.
My people ask counsel at their stock, and their staff declares to them, for the spirit of whoredom has caused them to err, and they have played the harlot, departing from under their God.
They sacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incense upon the hills, under oaks and poplars and terebinths, because the shadow of it is good. Therefore your daughters play the harlot, and your brides commit adultery.
I will not punish your daughters when they play the harlot, nor your brides when they commit adultery. For themselves go apart with harlots, and they sacrifice with the prostitutes. And the people who do not understand shall be overthrown.
Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Judah offend, and come not ye to Gilgal, nor go ye up to Beth-aven, nor swear, As Jehovah lives.
For Israel has behaved himself stubbornly, like a stubborn heifer. Now Jehovah will feed them as a lamb in a large place.
Ephraim is joined to idols, let him alone.
Their drink has become sour. They play the harlot continually. Her rulers dearly love shame.
The wind has wrapped her up in its wings, and they shall be put to shame because of their sacrifices.

Hear this, O ye priests, and hearken, O house of Israel, and give ear, O house of the king, for to you pertains the judgment. For ye have been a snare at Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor.
And the revolters have gone deep in making slaughter, but I am a rebuker of them all.
I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me. For now, O Ephraim, thou have played the harlot; Israel is defiled.
Their doings will not allow them to turn to their God, for the spirit of whoredom is within them, and they do not know Jehovah.
And the pride of Israel testifies to his face. Therefore Israel and Ephraim shall stumble in their iniquity. Judah also shall stumble with them.
They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek Jehovah, but they shall not find him. He has withdrawn himself from them.
They have dealt treacherously against Jehovah, for they have borne strange sons. Now the new moon shall devour them with their fields.
Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramah. Sound an alarm at Beth-aven, behind thee, O Benjamin.
Ephraim shall become a desolation in the day of rebuke. I have made known that which shall surely be among the tribes of Israel.
The rulers of Judah are like those who remove the landmark. I will pour out my wrath upon them like water.
Ephraim is oppressed. He is crushed in judgment, because he was content to walk after man's command.
Therefore I am to Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Judah as rottenness.
When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound, then Ephraim went to Assyria, and sent to king Jareb. But he is not able to heal you, nor will he cure you of your wound.
For I will be to Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house of Judah. I, even I, will tear and go away, I will carry off, and there shall be none to deliver.
I will go and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face. In their affliction they will seek me earnestly.

Come, and let us return to Jehovah, for he has torn, and he will heal us. He has smitten, and he will bind us up.
After two days he will revive us. On the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live before him.
And let us know, let us follow on to know Jehovah. His going forth is sure as the morning, and he will come to us as the rain, as the latter rain that waters the earth.
O Ephraim, what shall I do to thee? O Judah, what shall I do to thee? For your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the dew that goes away early.
Therefore I have hewed them by the prophets. I have slain them by the words of my mouth. And thy judgments are as the light that goes forth.
For I desire mercy, and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more than burnt offerings.
But like Adam they have transgressed the covenant. There they have dealt treacherously against me.
Gilead is a city of those who work iniquity; it is stained with blood.
And as troops of robbers wait for a man, so the company of priests murder in the way toward Shechem. Yea, they have committed iniquity.
I have seen a horrible thing in the house of Israel. Whoredom is there in Ephraim; Israel is defiled.
Also, O Judah, there is a harvest appointed for thee when I bring back the captivity of my people.

When I would heal Israel, then the iniquity of Ephraim is uncovered, and the wickedness of Samaria. For they commit falsehood, and the thief enters in, and the troop of robbers ravages outside.
And they do not consider in their hearts that I remember all their wickedness. Now their own doings have surrounded them; they are before my face.
They make the king glad with their wickedness, and the rulers with their lies.
They are all adulterers. They are as an oven heated by the baker. He ceases to stir the fire, from the kneading of the dough, until it is leavened.
On the day of our king the rulers made themselves sick with the heat of wine. He stretched out his hand with scoffers.
For they have made their heart ready like an oven, while they lie in wait. Their baker sleeps all the night. In the morning it burns as a flaming fire.
They are all hot as an oven, and devour their judges. All their kings are fallen. There is none among those who call to me.
Ephraim, he mixes himself among the peoples. Ephraim is a cake not turned.
Strangers have devoured his strength, and he does not know. Yea, gray hairs are here and there upon him, and he does not know.
And the pride of Israel testifies to his face. Yet they have not returned to Jehovah their God, nor sought him for all this.
And Ephraim is like a silly dove, without understanding. They call to Egypt. They go to Assyria.
When they shall go, I will spread my net upon them. I will bring them down as the birds of the heavens. I will chastise them, as their congregation has heard.
Woe to them! For they have wandered from me. Destruction to them! For they have trespassed against me. Though I would redeem them, yet they have spoken lies against me.
And they have not cried to me with their heart, but they howl upon their beds. They assemble themselves for grain and new wine. They rebel against me.
Though I have taught and strengthened their arms, yet they devise mischief against me.
They return, but not to him on high. They are like a deceitful bow. Their rulers shall fall by the sword for the rage of their tongue. This shall be their derision in the land of Egypt.

Set the trumpet to thy mouth. As an eagle he comes against the house of Jehovah, because they have transgressed my covenant, and trespassed against my law.
They shall cry to me, My God, we, Israel know thee.
Israel has cast off that which is good. The enemy shall pursue him.
They have set up kings, but not by me. They have made rulers, and I knew it not. They have made themselves idols of their silver and their gold, that they may be cut off.
He has cast off thy calf, O Samaria. My anger is kindled against them. How long will it be ere they attain to innocence?
the workman made it, and it is no God. Yea, the calf of Samaria shall be broken in pieces.
For they sow the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind. He has no standing grain. The blade shall yield no meal. If so be it yields, strangers shall swallow it up.
Israel is swallowed up. They are now among the nations as a vessel in which no man delights.
For they have gone up to Assyria like a wild donkey alone by himself. Ephraim has hired lovers.
Yea, though they hire among the nations, I will now gather them, and they shall begin to be diminished because of the burden of the king of rulers.
Because Ephraim has multiplied altars for sinning, altars have been to him for sinning.
I wrote for him the multitude of my law, but they are counted as a strange thing.
As for the sacrifices of my offerings, they sacrifice flesh and eat it, but Jehovah does not accept them. He will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins. They shall return to Egypt.
For Israel has forgotten his maker, and built palaces. And Judah has multiplied fortified cities. But I will send a fire upon his cities, and it shall devour the castles thereof.

Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy like the peoples, for thou have played the harlot, departing from thy God. Thou have loved hire upon every grain-floor.
The threshing floor and the winepress shall not feed them, and the new wine shall fail her.
They shall not dwell in Jehovah's land, but Ephraim shall return to Egypt, and they shall eat unclean food in Assyria.
They shall not pour out wine offerings to Jehovah, nor shall they be pleasing to him. Their sacrifices shall be to them as the bread of mourners. All who eat of it shall be polluted, for their bread shall be for their appetite. It shall not come into the house of Jehovah.
What will ye do in the day of solemn assembly, and in the day of the feast of Jehovah?
For, lo, they have gone away from destruction, yet Egypt shall gather them up. Memphis shall bury them. Their pleasant things of silver, nettles shall possess them. Thorns shall be in their tents.
The days of visitation have come. The days of recompense have come. Israel shall know it. The prophet is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the abundance of thine iniquity, and because the enmity is great.
Ephraim was a watchman with my God. As for the prophet, a fowler's snare is in all his ways, and enmity in the house of his God.
They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah. He will remember their iniquity. He will visit their sins.
I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness. I saw your fathers as the first ripe in the fig tree at its first season. But they came to Baal-peor, and consecrated themselves to the shameful thing, and became abominable like that which they loved.
As for Ephraim, their glory shall fly away like a bird. There shall be no birth, and none with child, and no conception.
Though they bring up their sons, yet I will bereave them, so that not a man shall be left. Yea, woe also to them when I depart from them!
Ephraim, just as I have seen Tyre, is planted in a pleasant place, but Ephraim shall bring out his sons to the slayer.
Give them, O Jehovah-what will thou give? Give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts.
All their wickedness is in Gilgal, for there I hated them. Because of the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of my house. I will love them no more. All their rulers are rebels.
Ephraim is smitten. Their root is dried up. They shall bear no fruit. Yea, though they bring forth, yet I will kill the beloved fruit of their womb.
My God will cast them away because they did not hearken to him, and they shall be wanderers among the nations.

Israel is a luxuriant vine that puts forth his fruit. According to the abundance of his fruit he has multiplied his altars. According to the goodness of their land they have made goodly pillars.
Their heart is divided. Now they shall be found guilty. He will smite their altars. He will destroy their pillars.
Surely now they shall say, We have no king, for we fear not Jehovah. And the king, what can he do for us?
They speak vain words, swearing falsely in making covenants. Therefore judgment springs up as hemlock in the furrows of the field.
The inhabitants of Samaria shall be in terror for the calves of Beth-aven. For the people of it shall mourn over it, and the priests of it, who rejoiced over it for the glory of it, because it has departed from it.
It shall also be carried to Assyria for a present to king Jareb. Ephraim shall receive shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his own counsel.
As for Samaria, its king is cut off, as foam upon the water.
The high places also of Aven, the sin of Israel, shall be destroyed. The thorn and the thistle shall come up on their altars, and they shall say to the mountains, Cover us, and to the hills, Fall on us.
O Israel, thou have sinned from the days of Gibeah. There they stood. The battle against the sons of iniquity does not overtake them in Gibeah.
When it is my desire, I will chastise them. And the peoples shall be gathered against them, when they are bound to their two transgressions.
And Ephraim is a heifer that is taught, that loves to tread out the grain. But I have passed over upon her fair neck. I will set a rider on Ephraim. Judah shall plow. Jacob shall break his clods.
Sow to yourselves in righteousness. Reap according to kindness. Break up your fallow ground, for it is time to seek Jehovah, till he comes and rains righteousness upon you.
Ye have plowed wickedness. Ye have reaped iniquity. Ye have eaten the fruit of lies. For thou trusted in thy way, in the multitude of thy mighty men.
Therefore a tumult shall arise among thy people, and all thy fortresses shall be destroyed, as Shalman destroyed Beth-arbel in the day of battle; the mother was dashed in pieces with her sons.
So shall Bethel do to you because of your great wickedness. At daybreak the king of Israel shall be utterly cut off.

When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and out of Egypt I called my son.
The more the prophets called them, the more they went from them. They sacrificed to the Baalim, and burned incense to graven images.
Yet I taught Ephraim to walk. I took them on my arms, but they did not know that I healed them.
I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love, and I was to them as those who lift up the yoke on their jaws. And I laid food before them.
They shall not return into the land of Egypt, but the Assyrian shall be their king, because they refused to return to me.
And the sword shall fall upon their cities, and shall consume their bars, and devour them, because of their own counsels.
And my people are bent on backsliding from me. Though they call them to him who is on high, none at all will exalt him.
How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I cast thee off, Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboiim? My heart is turned within me. My compassions are kindled together.
I will not execute the fierceness of my anger. I will not return to destroy Ephraim. For I am God, and not man, the Holy One in the midst of thee, and I will not come in wrath.
They shall walk after Jehovah, who will roar like a lion. For he will roar, and the sons shall come trembling from the west.
They shall come trembling as a bird out of Egypt, and as a dove out of the land of Assyria. And I will make them to dwell in their houses, says Jehovah.
Ephraim encompasses me around with falsehood, and the house of Israel with deceit, but Judah yet rules with God, and is faithful with the Holy One.

Ephraim feeds on wind, and follows after the east wind. He continually multiplies lies and desolation. And they make a covenant with Assyria, and oil is carried into Egypt.
Jehovah has also a controversy with Judah, and will punish Jacob according to his ways. He will recompense him according to his doings.
In the womb he took his brother by the heel, and in his manhood he had strength with God.
Yea, he had strength over the agent, and prevailed, as he wept, and made supplication to him. He found him at Bethel, and there he spoke with us.
Even Jehovah, the God of hosts, Jehovah is his memorial.
Therefore turn thou to thy God. Keep kindness and justice, and wait for thy God continually.
He is a Canaanite. The balances of deceit are in his hand. He loves to oppress.
And Ephraim said, Surely I have become rich. I have found wealth for myself. In all my labors they shall find no iniquity in me that is sin.
But I am Jehovah thy God from the land of Egypt. I will yet again make thee to dwell in tents, as in the days of the solemn feast.
I have also spoken to the prophets, and I have multiplied visions. And by the ministry of the prophets I have used similitudes.
Is Gilead iniquity? They are altogether false. In Gilgal they sacrifice bullocks. Yea, their altars are as heaps in the furrows of the field.
And Jacob fled into the field of Aram, and Israel served for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheep.
And by a prophet Jehovah brought Israel up out of Egypt, and by a prophet he was preserved.
Ephraim has provoked to anger most bitterly. Therefore his blood shall be left upon him, and his reproach his Lord shall return to him.

When Ephraim spoke, there was trembling. He exalted himself in Israel, but when he offended in Baal, he died.
And now they sin more and more, and have made themselves molten images of their silver, even idols according to their own understanding, all of them the work of the craftsmen. They say of them, Let the men who sacrifice kiss the calves.
Therefore they shall be as the morning cloud, and as the dew that passes away early, as the chaff that is driven with the whirlwind out of the threshing-floor, and as the smoke out of the chimney.
Yet I am Jehovah thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shall know no god but me, and besides me there is no savior.
I knew thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought.
According to their pasture, so they were filled. They were filled, and their heart was exalted. Therefore they have forgotten me.
Therefore I am to them as a lion. As a leopard I will watch by the way.
I will meet them as a bear that is bereaved of her whelps, and will rend the caul of their heart. And there I will devour them like a lioness. The wild beast shall tear them.
It is thy destruction, O Israel, that thou are against me, against thy help.
Where now is thy king, that he may save thee in all thy cities, and thy judges, of whom thou said, Give me a king and rulers?
I have given thee a king in my anger, and have taken him away in my wrath.
The iniquity of Ephraim is bound up. His sin is laid up in store.
The sorrows of a travailing woman shall come upon him. He is an unwise son, for it is time he should not tarry in the place of the breaking forth of sons.
I will ransom them from the power of Sheol. I will redeem them from death. O death, where are thy plagues? O Sheol, where is thy sting? Repentance shall be hid from my eyes.
Though he be fruitful among his brothers, an east wind shall come, the breath of Jehovah coming up from the wilderness, and his spring shall become dry, and his fountain shall be dried up. He shall make spoil of the treasure of all goodly vessels.
Samaria shall bear her guilt, for she has rebelled against her God. They shall fall by the sword. Their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be ripped up.

O Israel, return to Jehovah thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity.
Take with you words, and return to Jehovah. Say to him, Take away all iniquity, and accept that which is good. So we will render as bullocks the offering of our lips.
Assyria shall not save us. We will not ride upon horses, nor will we say any more to the work of our hands, Our gods. For in thee the fatherless finds mercy.
I will heal their backsliding. I will love them freely. For my anger is turned away from him.
I will be as the dew to Israel. He shall blossom as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon.
His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon.
Those who dwell under his shadow shall return. They shall revive as the grain, and blossom as the vine. The scent of it shall be as the wine of Lebanon.
Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with idols? I have answered, and will regard him. I am like a green fir tree. From me thy fruit is found.
Who is wise, that he may understand these things, prudent, that he may know them? For the ways of Jehovah are right, and the just shall walk in them. But transgressors shall fall therein.

Joel

The word of Jehovah that came to Joel the son of Pethuel.
Hear this, ye old men, and give ear, all ye inhabitants of the land. Has this been in your days, or in the days of your fathers?
Tell ye your sons of it, and let your sons tell their sons, and their sons another generation.
That which the palmer-worm has left the locust has eaten, and that which the locust has left the canker-worm has eaten, and that which the canker-worm has left the caterpillar has eaten.
Awake, ye drunkards, and weep, and wail, all ye drinkers of wine, because of the sweet wine, for it is cut off from your mouth.
For a nation has come up upon my land, strong, and without number. His teeth are the teeth of a lion, and he has the jaw-teeth of a lioness.
He has laid my vine waste, and barked my fig tree. He has made it clean bare, and cast it away. The branches of it are made white.
Lament like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the husband of her youth.
The meal offering and the drink offering are cut off from the house of Jehovah. The priests, Jehovah's ministers, mourn.
The field is laid waste; the land mourns. For the grain is destroyed, the new wine is dried up, the oil languishes.
Be confounded, O ye husbandmen. Wail, O ye vinedressers, for the wheat and for the barley, for the harvest of the field is perished.
The vine is withered, and the fig tree languishes. The pomegranate tree, the palm tree also, and the apple tree, even all the trees of the field are withered. For joy has withered away from the sons of men.
Gird yourselves with sackcloth, and lament, ye priests. Wail, ye ministers of the altar. Come, lie all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God. For the meal offering and the drink offering are withheld from the house of your God.
Sanctify a fast. Call a solemn assembly. Gather the old men and all the inhabitants of the land to the house of Jehovah your God, and cry to Jehovah.
Alas for the day! For the day of Jehovah is at hand, and it shall come as destruction from the Almighty.
Is not the food cut off before our eyes, yea, joy and gladness from the house of our God?
The seeds rot under their clods. The garners are laid desolate. The barns are broken down. For the grain is withered.
How do the beasts groan! The herds of cattle are perplexed because they have no pasture, yea, the flocks of sheep are made desolate.
O Jehovah, to thee do I cry. For the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and the flame has burned all the trees of the field.
Yea, the beasts of the field pant to thee, for the water brooks are dried up, and the fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness.

Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain. Let all the inhabitants of the land tremble. For the day of Jehovah comes, for it is near at hand,
a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness, as the dawn spreads upon the mountains, a great people and a strong, there has not ever been the like, nor shall be any more after them, even to the years of many generations.
A fire devours before them, and behind them a flame burns. The land is as the garden of Eden before them, and behind them a desolate wilderness. Yea, and none has escaped them.
The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses, and as horsemen, so do they run.
They leap like the noise of chariots on the tops of the mountains, like the noise of a flame of fire that devours the stubble, as a strong people set in battle array.
At their presence the peoples are in anguish; all faces have grown pale.
They run like mighty men. They climb the wall like men of war, and they march each one on his ways. And they do not break their ranks.
Neither does one push another. They march each one in his path, and they burst through the weapons, and do not break off.
They leap upon the city. They run upon the wall. They climb up into the houses. They enter in at the windows like a thief.
The earth quakes before them. The heavens tremble. The sun and the moon are darkened, and the stars withdraw their shining.
And Jehovah utters his voice before his army, for his camp is very great. For he is strong who executes his word. For the day of Jehovah is great and very fearful, and who can abide it?
Yet even now, says Jehovah, turn ye to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning.
And rend your heart, and not your garments, and turn to Jehovah your God, for he is gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in loving kindness, and relents of the evil.
Who knows whether he will not turn and relent, and leave a blessing behind him, even a meal offering and a drink offering to Jehovah your God?
Blow the trumpet in Zion. Sanctify a fast. Call a solemn assembly.
Gather the people. Sanctify the assembly. Assemble the old men. Gather the sons, and those who suck the breasts. Let the bridegroom go forth from his chamber, and the bride out of her closet.
Let the priests, the ministers of Jehovah, weep between the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Jehovah, and do not give thy heritage to reproach, that the nations should rule over them. Why should they say among the peoples, Where is their God?
Then Jehovah was jealous for his land, and had pity on his people.
And Jehovah answered and said to his people, Behold, I will send you grain, and new wine, and oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith. And I will no more make you a reproach among the nations.
But I will remove the northern army far off from you, and will drive it into a land barren and desolate, its forepart into the eastern sea, and its rear part into the western sea. And its stench shall come up, and its foul odor shall come up, because it has done great things.
Fear not, O land. Be glad and rejoice, for Jehovah has done great things.
Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field, for the pastures of the wilderness spring, for the tree bears its fruit, the fig tree and the vine yield their strength.
Be glad then, ye sons of Zion, and rejoice in Jehovah your God, for he gives you the former rain in just measure, and he causes the rain to come down for you, the former rain and the latter rain, in the first month.
And the floors shall be full of wheat, and the vats shall overflow with new wine and oil.
And I will restore to you the years that the locust, the canker-worm, and the caterpillar, and the palmer-worm has eaten-my great army which I sent among you.
And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied. And shall praise the name of Jehovah your God, who has dealt wondrously with you. And my people shall never be put to shame.
And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel, and that I am Jehovah your God, and there is none else. And my people shall never be put to shame.
And it shall come to pass afterward, that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy. Your old men shall dream dreams. Your young men shall see visions.
And also I will pour out my Spirit upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days.
And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth, blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke.
The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and wonderful day of Jehovah comes.
And it shall come to pass, that whoever shall call on the name of Jehovah shall be saved. For in mount Zion and in Jerusalem there shall be those who escape, as Jehovah has said, and among the remnant those whom Jehovah calls.

For, behold, in those days, and in that time, when I shall bring back the captivity of Judah and Jerusalem,
I will gather all nations, and will bring them down into the valley of Jehoshaphat. And I will execute judgment upon them there for my people and for my heritage Israel, whom they have scattered among the nations. And they have parted my land,
and have cast lots for my people, and have given a boy for a harlot, and sold a girl for wine, that they may drink.
Yea, and what are ye to me, O Tyre, and Sidon, and all the regions of Philistia? Will ye render me a recompense? And if ye recompense me, I will return your recompense swiftly and speedily upon your own head.
Inasmuch as ye have taken my silver and my gold, and have carried into your temples my goodly precious things,
and have sold the sons of Judah and the sons of Jerusalem to the sons of the Grecians, that ye may remove them far from their border,
behold, I will stir them up out of the place where ye have sold them, and will return your recompense upon your own head.
And I will sell your sons and your daughters into the hand of the sons of Judah, and they shall sell them to the men of Sheba, to a nation far off. For Jehovah has spoken it.
Prepare war. Stir up the mighty men. Let all the men of war draw near. Let them come up.
Beat your plowshares into swords, and your pruning-hooks into spears. Let the weak say, I am strong.
Hasten ye, and come, all ye nations round about, and gather yourselves together. Cause thy mighty ones to come down there, O Jehovah.
Let the nations bestir themselves, and come up to the valley of Jehoshaphat, for there I will sit to judge all the nations round about.
Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe. Come, tread ye, for the winepress is full, the vats overflow. For their wickedness is great.
Multitudes, multitudes in the valley of decision! For the day of Jehovah is near in the valley of decision.
The sun and the moon are darkened, and the stars withdraw their shining.
And Jehovah will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the heavens and the earth shall shake. But Jehovah will be a refuge to his people, and a stronghold to the sons of Israel.
So ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God, dwelling in Zion my holy mountain. Then Jerusalem shall be holy, and no strangers shall pass through her any more.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the mountains shall drop down sweet wine, and the hills shall flow with milk, and all the brooks of Judah shall flow with waters. And a fountain shall come forth from the house of Jehovah, and shall water the valley of Shittim.
Egypt shall be a desolation, and Edom shall be a desolate wilderness, for the violence done to the sons of Judah, because they have shed innocent blood in their land.
But Judah shall abide forever, and Jerusalem from generation to generation.
And I will cleanse their blood, that I have not cleansed. For Jehovah dwells in Zion.

Amos

The words of Amos, who was among the herdsmen of Tekoa, which he saw concerning Israel in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel, two years before the earthquake.
And he said, Jehovah will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem, and the pastures of the shepherds shall mourn, and the top of Carmel shall wither.
For three transgressions of Damascus, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron.
But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael, and it shall devour the palaces of Ben-hadad.
And I will break the bar of Damascus, and cut off the inhabitant from the valley of Aven, and he who holds the scepter from the house of Eden, and the people of Syria shall go into captivity to Kir, says Jehovah.
For three transgressions of Gaza, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they carried away captive the whole people, to deliver them up to Edom.
But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza, and it shall devour the palaces of it.
And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him who holds the scepter from Ashkelon. And I will turn my hand against Ekron, and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, says the lord Jehovah.
For three transgressions of Tyre, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they delivered up the whole people to Edom, and did not remember the brotherly covenant.
But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyre, and it shall devour the palaces of it.
For three transgressions of Edom, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because he pursued his brother with the sword, and cast off all pity. And his anger tore perpetually, and he kept his wrath forever.
But I will send a fire upon Teman, and it shall devour the palaces of Bozrah.
For three transgressions of the sons of Ammon, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they may enlarge their border.
But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and it shall devour the palaces of it, with shouting in the day of battle, with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind.
And their king shall go into captivity, he and his rulers together, says Jehovah.

For three transgressions of Moab, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because he burned the bones of the king of Edom into lime.
But I will send a fire upon Moab, and it shall devour the palaces of Kerioth, and Moab shall die with tumult, with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet.
And I will cut off the judge from the midst of it, and will kill all the rulers of it with him, says Jehovah.
For three transgressions of Judah, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they have rejected the law of Jehovah, and have not kept his statutes, and their lies have caused them to err, according to which their fathers walked.
But I will send a fire upon Judah, and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem.
For three transgressions of Israel, yea, for four, I will not turn away the punishment of it, because they have sold a righteous man for silver, and a needy man for a pair of shoes-
those who pant after the dust of the earth on the head of the poor, and turn aside the way of the meek. And a man and his father go to the same maiden, to profane my holy name.
And they lay themselves down beside every altar upon clothes taken in pledge. And in the house of their God they drink the wine of such as have been fined.
Yet I destroyed the Amorite before them, whose height was like the height of the cedars, and he was strong as the oaks, yet I destroyed his fruit from above, and his roots from beneath.
Also I brought you up out of the land of Egypt, and led you forty years in the wilderness, to possess the land of the Amorite.
And I raised up of your sons for prophets, and of your young men for Nazirites. Is it not even thus, O ye sons of Israel? says Jehovah.
But ye gave the Nazirites wine to drink, and commanded the prophets, saying, Do not Prophesy.
Behold, I will press you in your place, as a cart presses that is full of sheaves.
And flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen his force, nor shall the mighty deliver himself.
Neither shall he stand who handles the bow. And he who is swift of foot shall not deliver himself, nor shall he who rides the horse deliver himself.
And he who is courageous among the mighty shall flee away naked in that day, says Jehovah.

Hear this word that Jehovah has spoken against you, O sons of Israel, against the whole family which I brought up out of the land of Egypt, saying,
You only I have known of all the families of the earth. Therefore I will visit upon you all your iniquities.
Shall two walk together unless they have agreed?
Will a lion roar in the forest, when he has no prey? Will a young lion cry out of his den, if he has taken nothing?
Can a bird fall in a snare upon the earth, where no net is set for him? Shall a snare spring up from the ground, and have taken nothing at all?
Shall the trumpet be blown in a city, and the people not be afraid? Shall evil befall a city, and Jehovah has not done it?
Surely the lord Jehovah will do nothing unless he reveals his secret to his servants the prophets.
The lion has roared, who will not fear? The lord Jehovah has spoken, who can but prophesy?
Publish ye in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in the land of Egypt, and say, Assemble yourselves upon the mountains of Samaria, and behold what great tumults are in it, and what oppressions are in the midst of it.
For they do not know to do right, says Jehovah, who store up violence and robbery in their palaces.
An adversary shall be, even round about the land, and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be plundered.
As the shepherd rescues out of the mouth of the lion two legs, or a piece of an ear, so shall the sons of Israel be rescued who sit in Samaria in the corner of a couch, and on the silken cushions of a bed.
Hear ye, and testify against the house of Jacob, says the lord Jehovah, the God of hosts.
For in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Israel upon him, I will also visit the altars of Bethel, and the horns of the altar shall be cut off, and fall to the ground.
And I will smite the winter house with the summer house, and the houses of ivory shall perish, and the great houses shall have an end, says Jehovah.

Hear this word, ye cows of Bashan, who are in the mountain of Samaria, who oppress the poor, who crush the needy, who say to their lords, Bring, and let us drink.
The lord Jehovah has sworn by his holiness, that, lo, the days shall come upon you, that they shall take you away with hooks, and your residue with fish-hooks.
And ye shall go out at the breaches, each one straight before her, and ye shall cast yourselves into Harmon, says Jehovah.
Come to Bethel and transgress, to Gilgal and multiply transgression. And bring your sacrifices every morning, and your tithes every three days.
And offer a sacrifice of thanksgiving of that which is leavened, and proclaim freewill offerings, and publish them. For this pleases you, O ye sons of Israel, says the lord Jehovah.
And I also have given you cleanness of teeth in all your cities, and want of bread in all your places, yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
And I also have withheld the rain from you, when there were yet three months to the harvest. And I caused it to rain upon one city, and caused it not to rain upon another city. One piece was rained upon, and the piece upon which it did not rain withered.
So two or three cities wandered to one city to drink water, and were not satisfied. Yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
I have smitten you with blasting and mildew. The multitude of your gardens and your vineyards and your fig trees and your olive trees the palmer-worm has devoured. Yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
I have sent among you the pestilence according to the manner of Egypt. I have slain your young men with the sword, and have carried away your horses, and I have made the stench of your camp to come up even into your nostrils. Yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
I have overthrown cities among you, as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a brand plucked out of the burning. Yet ye have not returned to me, says Jehovah.
Therefore thus I will do to thee, O Israel, and because I will do this to thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel.
For, lo, he who forms the mountains, and creates the wind, and declares to man what is his thought, who makes the morning darkness, and treads upon the high places of the earth-Jehovah, the God of hosts, is his name.

Hear ye this word which I take up for a lamentation over you, O house of Israel.
The virgin of Israel is fallen; she shall no more rise. She is cast down upon her land; there is none to raise her up.
The city that went forth a thousand shall have a hundred left, and that which went forth a hundred shall have ten left, to the house of Israel.
Seek ye me, and ye shall live.
But seek not Bethel, nor enter into Gilgal, and pass not to Beersheba. For Gilgal shall surely go into captivity, and Bethel shall come to naught.
Seek Jehovah, and ye shall live, lest he break out like fire in the house of Joseph, and it devour, and there be none to quench it in Bethel.
Ye who turn justice to wormwood, and cast down righteousness to the earth,
seek him who makes the Pleiades and Orion, and turns the shadow of death into the morning, and makes the day dark with night, who calls for the waters of the sea, and pours them out upon the face of the earth (Jehovah is his name),
who brings sudden destruction upon the strong, so that destruction comes upon the fortress.
They hate him who reproves in the gate, and they abhor him who speaks uprightly.
Inasmuch therefore as ye trample upon the poor, and take exactions of wheat from him. Ye have built houses of hewn stone, but ye shall not dwell in them. Ye have planted pleasant vineyards, but ye shall not drink the wine thereof.
For I know how manifold are your transgressions, and how mighty are your sins-ye who afflict the just man, who take a bribe, and who turn aside the needy in the gate.
Therefore he who is prudent shall keep silence in such a time, for it is an evil time.
Seek good, and not evil, that ye may live, and so Jehovah, the God of hosts, will be with you, as ye say.
Hate the evil, and love the good, and establish justice in the gate. It may be that Jehovah, the God of hosts, will be gracious to the remnant of Joseph.
Wailing shall be in all the broad ways. And they shall say in all the streets, Alas! Alas! And they shall call the husbandman to mourning, and such as are skilful in lamentation to wailing.
And in all vineyards shall be wailing, for I will pass through the midst of thee, says Jehovah.
Woe to you who desire the day of Jehovah! Why would ye have the day of Jehovah? It is darkness, and not light.
As if a man fled from a lion, and a bear met him, or went into the house and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him.
Shall not the day of Jehovah be darkness, and not light, even very dark, and no brightness in it?
I hate, I despise your feasts, and I will take no delight in your solemn assemblies.
Yea, though ye offer me your burnt offerings and meal offerings, I will not accept them, nor will I regard the peace offerings of your fat beasts.
Take thou away from me the noise of thy songs, for I will not hear the melody of thy viols.
But let justice roll down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.
Did ye bring sacrifices and offerings to me in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel?
Yea, ye have borne the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, your images which ye made to yourselves.
Therefore I will cause you to go into captivity beyond Damascus, says Jehovah, whose name is the God of hosts.

Woe to those who are at ease in Zion, and to those who are secure in the mountain of Samaria, the notable men of the chief of the nations, to whom the house of Israel come!
Pass ye to Calneh, and see, and from there go ye to Hamath the great, then go down to Gath of the Philistines. Are they better than these kingdoms? Or is their border greater than your border?
Ye who put far away the evil day, and cause the seat of violence to come near,
who lie upon beds of ivory, and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat the lambs out of the flock, and the calves out of the midst of the stall,
who sing idle songs to the sound of the viol, who invent for themselves instruments of music, like David,
who drink wine in bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief oils, but they are not grieved for the affliction of Joseph.
Therefore they shall now go captive with the first who go captive, and the revelry of those who stretched themselves shall pass away.
I abhor the excellency of Jacob, and hate his palaces, therefore I will deliver up the city with all that is therein.
And it shall come to pass, if there remain ten men in one house, that they shall die.
And when a man's uncle shall take him up, even he who burns him, to bring out the bones out of the house, and shall say to him who is in the innermost parts of the house, Is there yet any with thee? and he shall say, No, then he shall say, Hold thy peace, for we may not make mention of the name of Jehovah.
For, behold, Jehovah commands, and the great house shall be smitten with breaches, and the little house with clefts.
Shall horses run upon the rock? Will a man plow there with oxen? That ye have turned justice into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood,
ye who rejoice in a thing of nothing, who say, Have we not taken to us horns by our own strength?
For, behold, I will raise up against you a nation, O house of Israel, says Jehovah, the God of hosts, and they shall afflict you from the entrance of Hamath to the brook of the Arabah.

And, behold, he formed locusts in the beginning of the shooting up of the latter growth, and, lo, it was the latter growth after the king's mowings.
And it came to pass that, when they made an end of eating the grass of the land, then I said, O lord Jehovah, forgive, I beseech thee. How shall Jacob stand, for he is small?
Jehovah relented concerning this. It shall not be, says Jehovah.
And, behold, the lord Jehovah called to contend by fire, and it devoured the great deep, and would have eaten up the land.
Then I said, O lord Jehovah, cease, I beseech thee. How shall Jacob stand, for he is small?
Jehovah relented concerning this. This also shall not be, says the lord Jehovah.
And, behold, the Lord stood beside a wall made by a plumb-line, with a plumb-line in his hand.
And Jehovah said to me, Amos, what do thou see? And I said, A plumb-line. Then the Lord said, Behold, I will set a plumb-line in the midst of my people Israel. I will not again pass by them any more.
And the high places of Isaac shall be desolate, and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste, and I will rise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword.
Then Amaziah the priest of Bethel sent to Jeroboam king of Israel, saying, Amos has conspired against thee in the midst of the house of Israel. The land is not able to bear all his words.
Jeroboam shall die by the sword, and Israel shall surely be led away captive out of his land.
Also Amaziah said to Amos, O thou seer, go, flee thou away into the land of Judah, and there eat bread, and prophesy there.
But do not prophesy again any more at Bethel, for it is the king's sanctuary, and it is a royal house.
Then Amos answered, and said to Amaziah, I was no prophet, nor was I a prophet's son, but I was a herdsman, and a dresser of sycamore trees.
And Jehovah took me from following the flock, and Jehovah said to me, Go, prophesy to my people Israel.
Thou say, Do not prophesy against Israel, and do not drop thy word against the house of Isaac.
Thy wife shall be a harlot in the city, and thy sons and thy daughters shall fall by the sword, and thy land shall be divided by line, and thou thyself shall die in a land that is unclean. And Israel shall surely be led away captive out of his land.

And, behold, a basket of summer fruit.
And he said, Amos, what do thou see? And I said, A basket of summer fruit. Then Jehovah said to me, The end has come upon my people Israel. I will not again pass by them any more.
And the songs of the temple shall be wailings in that day, says the lord Jehovah. The dead bodies shall be many. In every place they shall cast them forth with silence.
Hear this, O ye who would swallow up a needy man, and cause the poor of the land to fail,
saying, When will the new moon be gone, that we may sell grain? And the sabbath, that we may set forth wheat, making the ephah small, and the shekel great, and dealing falsely with balances of deceit,
that we may buy the poor for silver, and a needy man for a pair of shoes, and sell the refuse of the wheat?
Jehovah has sworn by the excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget any of their works.
Shall the land not tremble for this, and everyone mourn who dwells therein? Yea, it shall rise up wholly like the River, and it shall be troubled and sink again like the River of Egypt.
And it shall come to pass in that day, says the lord Jehovah, that I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will darken the earth in the clear day.
And I will turn your feasts into mourning, and all your songs into lamentation. And I will bring sackcloth upon all loins, and baldness upon every head, and I will make it as the mourning for an only son, and the end thereof as a bitter day.
Behold, the days come, says the lord Jehovah, that I will send a famine in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the words of Jehovah.
And they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the north even to the east. They shall run to and fro to seek the word of Jehovah, and shall not find it.
In that day the fair virgins and the young men shall faint for thirst.
Those who swear by the sin of Samaria, and say, As thy god, O Dan, lives, and, As the way of Beersheba lives, they shall fall, and never rise up again.

I saw the Lord standing beside the altar. And he said, Smite the capitals, that the thresholds may shake, and break them in pieces on the head of all of them, and I will kill the last of them with the sword. There shall not one of them flee away, and there shall not one of them escape.
Though they dig into Sheol, from there my hand shall take them, and though they climb up to heaven, from there I will bring them down.
And though they hide themselves on the top of Carmel, I will search and take them out from there. And though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea, from there I will command the serpent, and it shall bite them.
And though they go into captivity before their enemies, from there I will command the sword, and it shall kill them. And I will set my eyes upon them for evil, and not for good.
For the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, is he who touches the land and it melts, and all who dwell therein shall mourn. And it shall rise up wholly like the River, and shall sink again like the River of Egypt.
He who builds his chambers in the heavens, and has founded his vault upon the earth, he who calls for the waters of the sea, and pours them out upon the face of the earth, Jehovah is his name.
Are ye not as the sons of the Ethiopians to me, O sons of Israel? says Jehovah. Have I not brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt, and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir?
Behold, the eyes of the lord Jehovah are upon the sinful kingdom, and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth, except that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, says Jehovah.
For, lo, I will command, and I will sift the house of Israel among all the nations, just as grain is sifted in a sieve, yet the least kernel shall not fall upon the earth.
All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, who say, The evil shall not overtake nor meet us.
In that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof. And I will raise up its ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old,
that they may possess the remnant of Edom, and all the nations that are called by my name, says Jehovah who does this.
Behold, the days come, says Jehovah, that the plowman shall overtake the reaper, and the treader of grapes him who sows seed, and the mountains shall drop sweet wine, and all the hills shall melt.
And I will bring back the captivity of my people Israel, and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine of it. They shall also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them.
And I will plant them upon their land, and they shall no more be plucked up out of their land which I have given them, says Jehovah thy God.

Obadiah

We have heard tidings from Jehovah, and an ambassador is sent among the nations, saying, Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.
Behold, I have made thee small among the nations. Thou are greatly despised.
The pride of thy heart has deceived thee, O thou who dwell in the clefts of the rock, whose habitation is high, who says in his heart, Who shall bring me down to the ground?
Though thou mount on high as the eagle, and though thy nest be set among the stars, I will bring thee down from there, says Jehovah.
If thieves came to thee, if robbers by night (how thou are cut off!), would they not steal only till they had enough? If grape gatherers came to thee, would they not leave some gleaning grapes?
How are the things of Esau searched! How are his hidden treasures sought out!
All the men of thy confederacy have brought thee on thy way, even to the border. The men who were at peace with thee have deceived thee, and prevailed against thee. Those who eat thy bread lay a snare under thee. There is no understanding in him.
Shall I not in that day, says Jehovah, destroy the wise men out of Edom, and understanding out of the mount of Esau?
And thy mighty men, O Teman, shall be dismayed, to the end that everyone may be cut off from the mount of Esau by slaughter.
Shame shall cover thee for the violence done to thy brother Jacob, and thou shall be cut off forever.
In the day that thou stood on the other side, in the day that strangers carried away his substance, and foreigners entered into his gates, and cast lots upon Jerusalem, even thou were as one of them.
But look not thou on the day of thy brother in the day of his disaster, and rejoice not over the sons of Judah in the day of their destruction, nor speak proudly in the day of distress.
Enter not into the gate of my people in the day of their calamity. Yea, look not thou on their affliction in the day of their calamity, nor lay ye hands on their substance in the day of their calamity.
And stand thou not in the crossway, to cut off those of his who escape, and deliver not up those of his who remain in the day of distress.
For the day of Jehovah is near upon all the nations. As thou have done, it shall be done to thee. Thy dealing shall return upon thine own head.
For as ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so shall all the nations drink continually. Yea, they shall drink, and swallow down, and shall be as though they had not been.
But in mount Zion there shall be those who escape, and it shall be holy, and the house of Jacob shall possess their possessions.
And the house of Jacob shall be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau for stubble. And they shall burn among them, and devour them, and there shall not be any remaining to the house of Esau, for Jehovah has spoken it.
And those of the South shall possess the mount of Esau, and those of the lowland the Philistines. And they shall possess the field of Ephraim, and the field of Samaria, and Benjamin shall possess Gilead.
And the captives of this host of the sons of Israel, who are among the Canaanites, shall possess even to Zarephath. And the captives of Jerusalem who are in Sepharad shall possess the cities of the South.
And saviors shall come up on mount Zion to judge the mount of Esau, and the kingdom shall be Jehovah's.

Jonah

Now the word of Jehovah came to Jonah the son of Amittai, saying,
Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and cry against it, for their wickedness has come up before me.
But Jonah rose up to flee to Tarshish from the presence of Jehovah. And he went down to Joppa, and found a ship going to Tarshish. So he paid the fare of it, and went down into it, to go with them to Tarshish from the presence of Jehovah.
But Jehovah sent out a great wind upon the sea, and there was a mighty tempest on the sea, so that the ship was about to be broken.
Then the mariners were afraid, and cried every man to his god. And they cast forth the wares that were in the ship into the sea, to lighten it to them. But Jonah was gone down into the innermost parts of the ship, and he lay, and was fast asleep.
So the shipmaster came to him, and said to him, What do thou mean, O sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be that God will think upon us, that we not perish.
And they said every one to his fellow, Come, and let us cast lots, that we may know for whose cause this evil is upon us. So they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah.
Then they said to him, Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this evil is upon us. What is thine occupation? And from where do thou come? What is thy country, and of what people are thou?
And he said to them, I am a Hebrew, and I fear Jehovah, the God of heaven, who has made the sea and the dry land.
Then the men were exceedingly afraid, and said to him, What is this that thou have done? For the men knew that he was fleeing from the presence of Jehovah, because he had told them.
Then they said to him, What shall we do to thee, that the sea may be calm to us? For the sea grew more and more tempestuous.
And he said to them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea, so shall the sea be calm to you. For I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you.
Nevertheless the men rowed hard to get themselves back to the land, but they could not, for the sea grew more and more tempestuous against them.
Therefore they cried to Jehovah, and said, We beseech thee, O Jehovah, we beseech thee, let us not perish for this man's life, and lay not upon us innocent blood. For thou, O Jehovah, have done as it pleased thee.
So they took up Jonah, and cast him forth into the sea, and the sea ceased from its raging.
Then the men feared Jehovah exceedingly, and they offered a sacrifice to Jehovah, and made vows.
And Jehovah prepared a great sea creature to swallow up Jonah, and Jonah was in the belly of the sea creature three days and three nights.

Then Jonah prayed to Jehovah his God out of the sea creatures belly.
And he said, I called because of my affliction to Jehovah, and he answered me. Out of the belly of Sheol I cried, and thou heard my voice.
For thou cast me into the depth, in the heart of the seas, and the flood was round about me. All thy waves and thy billows passed over me.
And I said, I am cast out from before thine eyes. Yet I will look again toward thy holy temple.
The waters encompassed me around, even to the soul. The deep was round about me. The weeds were wrapped around my head.
I went down to the bottoms of the mountains. The earth with its bars closed upon me forever. Yet thou have brought up my life from the pit, O Jehovah my God.
When my soul fainted within me, I remembered Jehovah. And my prayer came in to thee, into thy holy temple.
Those who regard lying vanities forsake their own mercy.
But I will sacrifice to thee with the voice of thanksgiving. I will pay that which I have vowed. Salvation is of Jehovah.
And Jehovah spoke to the sea creature, and it vomited Jonah out upon the dry land.

And the word of Jehovah came to Jonah the second time, saying,
Arise, go to Nineveh, that great city, and preach to it the preaching that I bid thee.
So Jonah arose, and went to Nineveh, according to the word of Jehovah. Now Nineveh was an exceedingly great city, of three days' journey.
And Jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey. And he cried out, and said, Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown.
And the people of Nineveh believed God, and they proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.
And the news reached the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and laid his robe from him, and covered himself with sackcloth, and sat in ashes.
And he made proclamation and published through Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything. Let them not feed, nor drink water,
but let them be covered with sackcloth, both man and beast, and let them cry mightily to God. Yea, let them turn each one from his evil way, and from the violence that is in his hands.
Who knows whether God will not turn and relent, and turn away from his fierce anger, that we not perish?
And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil way. And God relented of the evil which he said he would do to them, and he did not do it.

But it displeased Jonah exceedingly, and he was angry.
And he prayed to Jehovah, and said, I pray thee, O Jehovah, was not this my saying, when I was yet in my country? Therefore I hastened to flee to Tarshish, for I knew that thou are a gracious God, and merciful, slow to anger, and abundant in loving kindness, and relent thee of the evil.
Therefore now, O Jehovah, I beseech thee, take my life from me, for it is better for me to die than to live.
And Jehovah said, Do thou well to be angry?
Then Jonah went out of the city, and sat on the east side of the city, and there made himself a booth, and sat under it in the shade, till he might see what would become of the city.
And Jehovah God prepared a gourd, and made it to come up over Jonah, that it might be a shade over his head, to deliver him from his misery. So Jonah was very glad because of the gourd.
But God prepared a worm when the morning rose the next day, and it smote the gourd, that it withered.
And it came to pass, when the sun arose, that God prepared a sultry east wind, and the sun beat upon the head of Jonah, that he fainted, and requested for himself that he might die, and said, It is better for me to die than to live.
And God said to Jonah, Do thou well to be angry for the gourd? And he said, I do well to be angry, even to death.
And Jehovah said, Thou have had regard for the gourd, for which thou have not labored, nor made it grow, which came up in a night, and perished in a night.
And should not I have regard for Nineveh, that great city, in which are more than one hundred and twenty thousand men who cannot discern between their right hand and their left hand, and also much cattle?

Micah

The word of Jehovah that came to Micah the Morashtite in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem.
Hear, ye peoples, all of you. Hearken, O earth, and all who are in it, and let the Lord Jehovah be witness against you, the Lord from his holy temple.
For, behold, Jehovah comes forth out of his place, and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth.
And the mountains shall be melted under him, and the valleys shall be split, as wax before the fire, as waters that are poured down a steep place.
All this is for the transgression of Jacob, and for the sins of the house of Israel. What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? And what are the high places of Judah? Are they not Jerusalem?
Therefore I will make Samaria as a heap of the field, and as places for planting vineyards. And I will pour down the stones of it into the valley, and I will uncover the foundations of it.
And all her graven images shall be beaten to pieces. And all her wages shall be burned with fire, and I will lay desolate all her idols. For she has gathered them from the wages of a harlot, and to the wage of a harlot they shall return.
For this I will lament and wail. I will go stripped and naked. I will make a wailing like the jackals, and a lamentation like the ostriches.
For her wounds are incurable. For it has come even to Judah. it reaches to the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem.
Tell it not in Gath. Weep not at all. I have rolled myself in the dust at Beth-le-aphrah.
Pass away, O inhabitant of Shaphir, in nakedness and shame. The inhabitant of Zaanan has not come forth. The wailing of Beth-ezel shall take from you the stay of it.
For the inhabitant of Maroth waits anxiously for good, because evil has come down from Jehovah to the gate of Jerusalem.
Bind the chariot to the swift steed, O inhabitant of Lachish. She was the beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion, for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee.
Therefore thou shall give a parting gift to Moresheth-gath. The houses of Achzib shall be a deceitful thing to the kings of Israel.
I will yet bring to thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah, him who shall possess thee. The glory of Israel shall come even to Adullam.
Make thee bald, and cut off thy hair for the sons of thy delight. Enlarge thy baldness as the vulture, for they have gone into captivity from thee.

Woe to those who devise iniquity and work evil upon their beds! When the morning is light they practice it, because it is in the power of their hand.
And they covet fields, and seize them, and houses, and take them away. And they oppress a man and his house, even a man and his heritage.
Behold, I devise an evil against this family, from which ye shall not remove your necks, nor shall ye walk haughtily, for it is an evil time.
In that day they shall take up a taunt against you, and lament with a doleful lamentation. And say, We are utterly ruined. He changes the portion of my people. How he removes it from me! He divides our fields to the rebellious.
Therefore thou shall have nobody to cast the line by lot in the assembly of Jehovah.
Prophesy ye not, they prophesy. They shall not prophesy to these, so reproaches shall not depart.
Shall it be said, O house of Jacob, Is the Spirit of Jehovah restricted? Are these his doings? Do not my words do good to him who walks uprightly?
But of late my people have risen up as an enemy. Ye strip off the robe with the garment from those who pass by securely as men turning back from war.
Ye cast out the women of my people from their pleasant houses. Ye take away my glory from their young sons forever.
Arise ye, and depart, for this is not your resting-place, because of uncleanness that destroys, even with a grievous destruction.
If a man walking in a spirit of falsehood lies, saying, I will prophesy to thee of wine and of strong drink, he shall even be the prophet of this people.
I will surely assemble, O Jacob, all of thee. I will surely gather the remnant of Israel. I will put them together as the sheep of Bozrah, as a flock in the midst of their pasture. They shall make great noise because of the multitude of men.
The breaker has gone up before them. They have broken forth and passed on to the gate, and have gone out there. And their king has passed on before them, and Jehovah at the head of them.

And I said, Hear, I pray you, ye heads of Jacob, and rulers of the house of Israel. Is it not for you to know justice?
Ye who hate the good, and love the evil, who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their bones,
who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them, and break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron.
Then they shall cry to Jehovah, but he will not answer them. Yea, he will hide his face from them at that time, according as they have wrought evil in their doings.
Thus says Jehovah concerning the prophets who make my people to err, who bite with their teeth, and cry, Peace. And he who does not put into their mouths, they even prepare war against him.
Therefore it shall be night to you, that ye shall have no vision. And it shall be dark to you, that ye shall not divine. And the sun shall go down upon the prophets, and the day shall be black over them.
And the seers shall be put to shame, and the diviners confounded. Yea, they shall all cover their lips, for there is no answer from God.
But as for me, I am full of power by the Spirit of Jehovah, and of judgment, and of might, to declare to Jacob his transgression, and to Israel his sin.
Hear this, I pray you, ye heads of the house of Jacob, and rulers of the house of Israel, who abhor justice, and pervert all equity.
They build up Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with iniquity.
The heads of it judge for a bribe, and the priests of it teach for a wage, and the prophets of it divine for money. Yet they lean upon Jehovah, and say, Is not Jehovah in the midst of us? No evil shall come upon us.
Therefore for your sake Zion shall be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of a forest.

But in the latter days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of Jehovah's house shall be established on the top of the mountains, and it shall be exalted above the hills, and peoples shall flow to it.
And many nations shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the mountain of Jehovah, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths. For out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of Jehovah from Jerusalem.
And he will judge between many peoples, and will decide concerning strong nations afar off. And they shall beat their swords into plowshares, and their spears into pruning-hooks. Nation shall not lift up sword against nation, nor shall they learn war any more.
But they shall sit every man under his vine and under his fig tree, and none shall make them afraid. For the mouth of Jehovah of hosts has spoken it.
For all the peoples walk each one in the name of his god. And we will walk in the name of Jehovah our God forever and ever.
In that day, says Jehovah, I will assemble that which is lame, and I will gather that which is driven away, and that which I have afflicted.
And I will make that which was lame a remnant, and that which was cast far off a strong nation. And Jehovah will reign over them in mount Zion from henceforth even forever.
And thou, O tower of the flock, the hill of the daughter of Zion, to thee it shall come. Yea, the former dominion shall come, the kingdom of the daughter of Jerusalem.
Now why do thou cry out aloud? Is there no king in thee? Has thy counselor perished, that pangs have taken hold of thee as of a woman in travail?
Be in pain, and labor to bring forth, O daughter of Zion, like a woman in travail. For now thou shall go forth out of the city, and shall dwell in the field, and shall come even to Babylon. There thou shall be rescued. There Jehovah will redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies.
And now many nations are assembled against thee, who say, Let her be defiled, and let our eye see our desire upon Zion.
But they know not the thoughts of Jehovah, nor do they understand his counsel, for he has gathered them as the sheaves to the threshing-floor.
Arise and thresh, O daughter of Zion, for I will make thy horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass, and thou shall beat many peoples in pieces. And I will devote their gain to Jehovah, and their substance to the Lord of the whole earth.

Now thou shall gather thyself in troops, O daughter of troops. He has laid siege against us. They shall smite the judge of Israel with a rod upon the cheek.
But thou, Bethlehem Ephrathah, which are little to be among the thousands of Judah, out of thee he shall come forth to me who is to be ruler in Israel, whose goings forth are from of old, from everlasting.
Therefore he will give them up until the time that she who travails has brought forth. Then the residue of his brothers shall return to the sons of Israel.
And he shall stand, and shall feed his flock in the strength of Jehovah, in the majesty of the name of Jehovah his God, and they shall abide. For now he shall be great to the ends of the earth.
And this man shall be our peace. When the Assyrian shall come into our land, and when he shall tread in our palaces, then we shall raise against him seven shepherds, and eight principal men.
And they shall waste the land of Assyria with the sword, and the land of Nimrod in the entrances of it. And he shall deliver us from the Assyrian, when he comes into our land, and when he treads within our border.
And the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst of many peoples as dew from Jehovah, as showers upon the grass, that tarry not for man, nor wait for the sons of men.
And the remnant of Jacob shall be among the nations, in the midst of many peoples, as a lion among the beasts of the forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he goes through, treads down and tears in pieces, and there is none to deliver.
Let thy hand be lifted up above thine adversaries, and let all thine enemies be cut off.
And it shall come to pass in that day, says Jehovah, that I will cut off thy horses out of the midst of thee, and will destroy thy chariots,
and I will cut off the cities of thy land, and will throw down all thy strongholds.
And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy hand, and thou shall have no more soothsayers.
And I will cut off thy graven images and thy pillars out of the midst of thee, and thou shall no more worship the work of thy hands.
And I will pluck up thine Asherim out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy cities.
And I will execute vengeance in anger and wrath upon the nations that did not hearken.

Arise, contend thou before the mountains, and let the hills hear thy voice.
Hear, O ye mountains, Jehovah's controversy, and ye enduring foundations of the earth, for Jehovah has a controversy with his people, and he will contend with Israel.
O my people, what have I done to thee? And in what have I wearied thee? Testify against me.
For I brought thee up out of the land of Egypt, and redeemed thee out of the house of bondage. And I sent before thee Moses, Aaron, and Miriam.
O my people, remember now what Balak king of Moab devised, and what Balaam the son of Beor answered him. Remember from Shittim to Gilgal, that ye may know the righteous acts of Jehovah.
With what shall I come before Jehovah, and bow myself before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offerings, with calves a year old?
Will Jehovah be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousand rivers of oil? Shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul?
He has shown thee, O man, what is good. And what does Jehovah require of thee, but to do justly, and to love kindness, and to walk humbly with thy God?
The voice of Jehovah cries to the city, and the man of wisdom will see thy name. Hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it.
Are there yet treasures of wickedness in the house of the wicked, and a scant measure that is abominable?
Shall I be pure with wicked balances, and with a bag of deceitful weights?
For the rich men of it are full of violence, and the inhabitants of it have spoken lies, and their tongue is deceitful in their mouth.
Therefore I also have smitten thee with a grievous wound, I have made thee desolate because of thy sins.
Thou shall eat, but not be satisfied, and thy humiliation shall be in the midst of thee. And thou shall put away, but shall not save, and that which thou save I will give up to the sword.
Thou shall sow, but shall not reap, thou shall tread the olives, but shall not anoint thee with oil, and the vintage, but shall not drink the wine.
For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab, and ye walk in their counsels, that I may make thee a desolation, and the inhabitants thereof a hissing. And ye shall bear the reproach of my people.

Woe is me! For I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grape gleanings of the vintage. There is no cluster to eat. My soul desires the first ripe fig.
The devout man has perished out of the earth, and there is none upright among men. They all lie in wait for blood. They hunt every man his brother with a net.
Their hands are upon that which is evil to do it diligently. The ruler asks, and the judge asks for a bribe. And the great man, he utters the evil desire of his soul. Thus they weave it together.
The best of them is as a brier. The most upright is worse than a thorn hedge. The day of thy watchmen, even thy visitation, has come. Now shall be their perplexity.
Trust ye not in a neighbor. Put ye not confidence in a friend. Keep the doors of thy mouth from her who lies in thy bosom.
For the son dishonors the father. The daughter rises up against her mother, the daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law. A man's enemies are the men of his own house.
But as for me, I will look to Jehovah. I will wait for the God of my salvation. My God will hear me.
Rejoice not against me, O my enemy. When I fall, I shall arise. When I sit in darkness, Jehovah will be a light to me.
I will bear the indignation of Jehovah, because I have sinned against him, until he pleads my case, and executes judgment for me. He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his righteousness.
Then my enemy shall see it, and shame shall cover her who said to me, Where is Jehovah thy God? My eyes shall see my desire upon her. Now she shall be trodden down as the mire of the streets.
A day for building thy walls! In that day the decree shall be far removed.
In that day they shall come to thee from Assyria and the cities of Egypt, and from Egypt even to the River, and from sea to sea, and mountain to mountain.
Yet the land shall be desolate because of those who dwell therein, for the fruit of their doings.
Feed thy people with thy rod, the flock of thy heritage, which dwell solitarily in the forest in the midst of Carmel. Let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of old.
As in the days of thy coming forth out of the land of Egypt I will show marvelous things to them.
The nations shall see and be ashamed of all their might. They shall lay their hand upon their mouth. Their ears shall be deaf.
They shall lick the dust like a serpent. Like crawling things of the earth they shall come trembling out of their close places. They shall come with fear to Jehovah our God, and shall be afraid because of thee.
Who is a God like to thee, who pardons iniquity, and passes over the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He does not retain his anger forever, because he delights in loving kindness.
He will again have compassion upon us. He will tread our iniquities under foot, and thou will cast all their sins into the depths of the sea.
Thou will perform the truth to Jacob, and the loving kindness to Abraham, which thou have sworn to our fathers from the days of old.

Nahum

The burden of Nineveh. The book of the vision of Nahum the Elkoshite.
Jehovah is a jealous God and avenges. Jehovah avenges and is full of wrath. Jehovah takes vengeance on his adversaries, and he reserves wrath for his enemies.
Jehovah is slow to anger, and great in power, and will by no means clear the guilty. Jehovah has his way in the whirlwind and in the storm, and the clouds are the dust of his feet.
He rebukes the sea, and makes it dry, and dries up all the rivers. Bashan languishes, and Carmel, and the flower of Lebanon languishes.
The mountains quake at him, and the hills melt, and the earth is up heaved at his presence. Yea, the world, and all who dwell therein.
Who can stand before his indignation? And who can abide in the fierceness of his anger? His wrath is poured out like fire, and the rocks are broken apart by him.
Jehovah is good, a stronghold in the day of trouble, and he knows those who take refuge in him.
But with an over running flood he will make a full end of her place, and will pursue his enemies into darkness.
What do ye devise against Jehovah? He will make a full end. Affliction shall not rise up the second time.
For entangled like thorns, and drunken as with their drink, they are consumed utterly as dry stubble.
He has gone forth out of thee, who devises evil against Jehovah, who counsels wickedness.
Though they be in full strength, and likewise many, even so they shall be cut down. And he shall pass away. Though I have afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more.
And now I will break his yoke from off thee, and will burst thy bonds apart.
And Jehovah has given commandment concerning thee, that no more of thy name be sown. Out of the house of thy gods I will cut off the graven image and the molten image. I will make thy grave, for thou are vile.
Behold, upon the mountains the feet of him who brings good news, who publishes peace! Keep thy feasts, O Judah. Perform thy vows, for the wicked one shall no more pass through thee. He is utterly cut off.

He who dashes in pieces has come up against thee. Keep the fortress. Watch the way. Make thy loins strong. Fortify thy power mightily.
For Jehovah restores the excellency of Jacob, as the excellency of Israel, for the emptiers have emptied them out, and destroyed their vine-branches.
The shield of his mighty men is made red. The valiant men are in scarlet. The chariots flash with steel in the day of his preparation, and the cypress spears are brandished.
The chariots rage in the streets; they rush to and fro in the broad ways. The appearance of them is like torches. They run like the lightnings.
He remembers his nobles. They stumble in their march. They make haste to the wall of it, and the mantelet is prepared.
The gates of the rivers are opened, and the palace is dissolved.
And it is decreed. She is uncovered. She is carried away, and her handmaids moan as with the voice of doves, beating upon their breasts.
But Nineveh has been from of old like a pool of water. Yet they flee away. Stand, stand, they cry, but none looks back.
Take ye the spoil of silver. Take the spoil of gold. For there is no end of the store, the glory of all goodly furniture.
She is empty, and void, and waste. And the heart melts, and the knees smite together, and anguish is in all loins, and the faces of them all have grown pale.
Where is the den of the lions, and the feeding-place of the young lions, where the lion and the lioness walked, the lion's whelp, and none made them afraid?
The lion tore in pieces enough for his whelps, and strangled for his lionesses, and filled his caves with prey, and his dens with prey.
Behold, I am against thee, says Jehovah of hosts, and I will burn her chariots in the smoke, and the sword shall devour thy young lions. And I will cut off thy prey from the earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall no more be heard.

Woe to the bloody city! It is all full of lies and rapine. The prey departs not.
The noise of the whip, and the noise of the rattling of wheels, and prancing horses, and bounding chariots,
the horseman mounting, and the flashing sword, and the glittering spear, and a multitude of slain, and a great heap of corpses, and there is no end of the bodies. They stumble upon their bodies,
because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the well-favored harlot, the mistress of witchcrafts, who sells nations through her whoredoms, and families through her witchcrafts.
Behold, I am against thee, says Jehovah of hosts, and I will uncover thy skirts upon thy face, and I will show the nations thy nakedness, and the kingdoms thy shame.
And I will cast abominable filth upon thee, and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gazing-stock.
And it shall come to pass, that all those who look upon thee shall flee from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste. Who will bemoan her? From where shall I seek comforters for thee?
Are thou better than No-amon, that was situated among the rivers, that had the waters round about her, whose rampart was the sea, and her wall was of the sea?
Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and it was infinite. Put and Lubim were thy helpers.
Yet she was carried away. She went into captivity. Her young sons also were dashed in pieces at the head of all the streets. And they cast lots for her honorable men, and all her great men were bound in chains.
Thou also shall be drunken. Thou shall be hid. Thou also shall seek a stronghold because of the enemy.
All thy fortresses shall be like fig trees with the first ripe figs. If they be shaken, they fall into the mouth of the eater.
Behold, thy people in the midst of thee are women. The gates of thy land are set wide open to thine enemies. The fire has devoured thy bars.
Draw thee water for the siege. Strengthen thy fortresses. Go into the clay, and tread the mortar. Make strong the brick kiln.
There the fire shall devour thee. The sword shall cut thee off. It shall devour thee like the canker-worm. Make thyself many as the canker-worm. Make thyself many as the locust.
Thou have multiplied thy merchants above the stars of heaven. The canker-worm ravages, and flees away.
Thy rulers are as the locusts, and thy marshals as the swarms of grasshoppers, which encamp in the hedges in the cold day, but when the sun arises they flee away, and their place is not known where they are.
Thy shepherds slumber, O king of Assyria. Thy nobles are at rest. Thy people are scattered upon the mountains, and there is none to gather them.
There is no assuaging of thy hurt. Thy wound is grievous. All who hear the report of thee clap their hands over thee, for upon whom has not thy wickedness passed continually?

Habakkuk

The burden which Habakkuk the prophet saw.
O Jehovah, how long shall I cry, and thou will not hear? I cry out to thee of violence, and thou will not save.
Why do thou show me iniquity, and look upon perverseness? For destruction and violence are before me, and there is strife, and contention rises up.
Therefore the law is slacked, and justice never goes forth. For the wicked man surrounds the righteous man, therefore justice goes forth perverted.
Behold ye scoffers, and look, and wonder marvelously. For I am working a work in your days, which ye will not believe though it be told you.
For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans, that bitter and hasty nation, who march through the breadth of the earth to possess dwelling-places that are not theirs.
They are fearful and dreadful. Their judgment and their dignity proceed from themselves.
Their horses also are swifter than leopards, and are more fierce than the evening wolves. And their horsemen press proudly on. Yea, their horsemen come from far. They fly as an eagle that hastens to devour.
They come all of them for violence. The set of their faces is forwards, and they gather captives as the sand.
Yea, he scoffs at kings, and rulers are a derision to him. He derides every stronghold, for he heaps up dust, and takes it.
Then he shall sweep by as a wind, and shall pass over, and be guilty; he whose might is his god.
Are not thou from everlasting, O Jehovah my God, my Holy One? We shall not die. O Jehovah, thou have ordained him for judgment, and thou, O Rock, have established him for correction.
Thou who are of purer eyes than to behold evil, and who cannot look on perverseness, why do thou look upon those who deal treacherously, and hold thy peace when the wicked man swallows up the man who is more righteous than he,
and makes men as the fishes of the sea, as the creeping things, that have no ruler over them?
He takes all of them up with the hook. He catches them in his net, and gathers them in his drag. Therefore he rejoices and is glad.
Therefore he sacrifices to his net, and burns incense to his drag, because by them his portion is fat, and his food plentiful.
Shall he therefore empty his net, and not spare to kill the nations continually?

I will stand upon my watch, and set myself upon the tower, and will look forth to see what he will speak with me, and what I shall answer concerning my complaint.
And Jehovah answered me, and said, Write the vision, and make it plain upon tablets, that he may run who reads it.
For the vision is yet for the appointed time, and it hastens toward the end, and shall not lie. Though it tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come. It will not delay.
Behold, his soul is puffed up; it is not upright in him. (But the righteous man shall live by his faith.
Yea, moreover, wine is treacherous.) He is a haughty man, who does not keep at home, who enlarges his desire as Sheol, and he is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but gathers to him all nations, and heaps to him all peoples.
Shall not all these take up a derision against him, and a taunting proverb against him, and say, Woe to him who increases that which is not his (how long?) and who loads himself with pledges!
Shall they not rise up suddenly that shall bite thee, and awake that shall vex thee. And thou shall be for booty to them?
Because thou have plundered many nations, all the remnant of the peoples shall plunder thee, because of men's blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all who dwell therein.
Woe to him who gets an evil gain for his house, that he may set his nest on high, that he may be delivered from the hand of evil!
Thou have devised shame to thy house, by cutting off many peoples, and have sinned against thy soul.
For the stone shall cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall answer it.
Woe to him who builds a town with blood, and establishes a city by iniquity!
Behold, is it not of Jehovah of hosts that the peoples labor for the fire, and the nations weary themselves for vanity?
For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of the glory of Jehovah, as the waters cover the sea.
Woe to him who gives his neighbor drink, who adds thy venom, and also makes him drunken, that thou may look on their nakedness!
Thou are filled with shame, and not glory. Drink thou also, and be as one uncircumcised. The cup of Jehovah's right hand shall come around to thee, and foul shame shall be upon thy glory.
For the violence done to Lebanon shall cover thee and the plunder of the beasts (which made them afraid), because of men's blood, and for the violence done to the land, to the city and to all who dwell therein.
What profits the graven image, that the maker of it has engraved it, the molten image, even the teacher of lies, that he who fashions its form trusts in it, to make dumb idols?
Woe to him who says to the wood, Awake, to the dumb stone, Arise! Shall this teach? Behold, it is overlaid with gold and silver, and there is no breath at all in the midst of it.
But Jehovah is in his holy temple. Let all the earth keep silence before him.

A prayer of Habakkuk the prophet, set to Shigionoth.
O Jehovah, I have heard the report of thee, and am afraid. O Jehovah, revive thy work in the midst of the years. In the midst of the years make it known. In wrath remember mercy.
God came from Teman, and the Holy One from mount Paran. Selah. His glory covered the heavens, and the earth was full of his praise.
And his brightness was as the light. He had rays from his hand, and there was the hiding of his power.
Before him went the pestilence. And fiery bolts went forth at his feet.
He stood, and measured the earth. He beheld, and drove apart the nations. And the eternal mountains were scattered. The everlasting hills bowed. His goings were as of old.
I saw the tents of Cushan in affliction. The curtains of the land of Midian trembled.
Was Jehovah displeased with the rivers? Was thine anger against the rivers, or thy wrath against the sea, that thou rode upon thy horses, upon thy chariots of salvation?
Thy bow was made quite bare. The oaths to the tribes were a sure word. Selah. Thou split the earth with rivers.
The mountains saw thee, and were afraid. The tempest of waters passed by. The deep uttered its voice, and lifted up its hands on high.
The sun and moon stood still in their habitation, at the light of thine arrows as they went, at the shining of thy glittering spear.
Thou marched though the land in indignation. Thou threshed the nations in anger.
Thou went forth for the salvation of thy people, for the salvation of thine anointed. Thou wound the head out of the house of the wicked man, laying bare the foundation even to the neck. Selah.
Thou pierced with his own staves the head of his warriors. They came as a whirlwind to scatter me. Their rejoicing was as to devour the poor man secretly.
Thou walked through the sea with thy horses, the heap of mighty waters.
I heard, and my body trembled. My lips quivered at the voice. Rottenness enters into my bones, and I tremble in my place, because I must wait quietly for the day of trouble, for the coming up of the people who invade us.
For though the fig tree shall not flourish, nor shall fruit be in the vines; the labor of the olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no food; the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls;
yet I will rejoice in Jehovah. I will joy in the God of my salvation.
Jehovah, the Lord, is my strength. And he makes my feet like hinds' feet, and will make me to walk upon my high places.

Zephaniah

The word of Jehovah which came to Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah, the son of Hezekiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king of Judah.
I will utterly consume all things from off the face of the ground, says Jehovah.
I will consume man and beast. I will consume the birds of the heavens, and the fishes of the sea, and the stumbling blocks with the wicked. And I will cut off man from off the face of the ground, says Jehovah.
And I will stretch out my hand upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Chemarim with the priests,
and those who worship the host of heaven upon the housetops, and those who worship, who swear to Jehovah and swear by Malcam,
and those who are turned back from following Jehovah, and those who have not sought Jehovah, nor inquired after him.
Hold thy peace at the presence of the lord Jehovah, for the day of Jehovah is at hand. For Jehovah has prepared a sacrifice. He has consecrated his guests.
And it shall come to pass in the day of Jehovah's sacrifice, that I will punish the rulers, and the king's sons, and all such as are clothed with foreign apparel.
And in that day I will punish all those who leap over the threshold, who fill their master's house with violence and deceit.
And in that day, says Jehovah, there shall be the noise of a cry from the fish gate, and a wailing from the second quarter, and a great crashing from the hills.
Wail, ye inhabitants of Maktesh, for all the people of Canaan are undone. All those who were laden with silver are cut off.
And it shall come to pass at that time, that I will search Jerusalem with lamps, and I will punish the men who are settled on their lees, who say in their heart, Jehovah will not do good, nor will he do evil.
And their wealth shall become a spoil, and their houses a desolation. Yea, they shall build houses, but shall not inhabit them, and they shall plant vineyards, but shall not drink the wine of it.
The great day of Jehovah is near. It is near and hastens greatly, the voice of the day of Jehovah. The mighty man cries there bitterly.
That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,
a day of the trumpet and alarm, against the fortified cities, and against the high battlements.
And I will bring distress upon men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned against Jehovah, and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their flesh as dung.
Neither their silver nor their gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of Jehovah's wrath, but the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy. For he will make an end, yea, a terrible end, of all those who dwell in the land.

Gather yourselves together, yea, gather together, O nation that has no shame;
before the decree bring forth, before the day passes as the chaff, before the fierce anger of Jehovah comes upon you, before the day of Jehovah's anger comes upon you.
Seek ye Jehovah, all ye meek of the earth who have kept his ordinances. Seek righteousness, seek meekness. It may be ye will be hid in the day of Jehovah's anger.
For Gaza shall be forsaken, and Ashkelon a desolation. They shall drive out Ashdod at noonday, and Ekron shall be rooted up.
Woe to the inhabitants of the seacoast, the nation of the Cherethites! The word of Jehovah is against you, O Canaan, the land of the Philistines. I will destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.
And the seacoast shall be pastures, with cottages for shepherds and folds for flocks.
And the coast shall be for the remnant of the house of Judah. They shall feed their flocks upon it. In the houses of Ashkelon they shall lie down in the evening. For Jehovah their God will visit them, and bring back their captivity.
I have heard the reproach of Moab, and the revilings of the sons of Ammon, with which they have reproached my people, and magnified themselves against their border.
Therefore as I live, says Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the sons of Ammon as Gomorrah, a possession of nettles, and salt pits, and a perpetual desolation. The residue of my people shall make a prey of them, and the remnant of my nation shall inherit them.
They shall have this for their pride, because they have reproached and magnified themselves against the people of Jehovah of hosts.
Jehovah will be terrible to them, for he will famish all the gods of the earth. And men shall worship him, everyone from his place, even all the isles of the nations.
Ye Ethiopians also, ye shall be slain by my sword.
And he will stretch out his hand against the north, and destroy Assyria, and will make Nineveh a desolation, and dry like the wilderness.
And herds shall lie down in the midst of her. All the beasts of the nations, both the pelican and the porcupine shall lodge in the capitals of it. Their voice shall sing in the windows. Desolation shall be in the thresholds. For he has laid bare the cedar work.
This is the joyous city that dwelt carelessly, that said in her heart, I am, and there is none besides me. How she has become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie down in! Everyone who passes by her shall hiss, and wag his hand.

Woe to her who is rebellious and polluted, to the oppressing city!
She obeyed not the voice. She received not correction. She trusted not in Jehovah. She did not draw near to her God.
Her rulers in the midst of her are roaring lions. Her judges are evening wolves. They leave nothing till the morrow.
Her prophets are airy and treacherous men. Her priests have profaned the sanctuary. They have done violence to the law.
Jehovah in the midst of her is righteous. He will not do iniquity. Every morning he brings his justice to light. He does not fail, but the unjust man knows no shame.
I have cut off nations. Their battlements are desolate. I have made their streets waste, so that none passes by. Their cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, so that there is no inhabitant.
I said, Only fear thou me. Receive correction, so her dwelling shall not be cut off, according to all that I have appointed concerning her. But they rose early and corrupted all their doings.
Therefore wait ye for me, says Jehovah, until the day that I rise up to the prey. For my determination is to gather the nations, that I may assemble the kingdoms, to pour upon them my indignation, even all my fierce anger. For all the earth shall be devoured with the fire of my jealousy.
For then I will turn to the peoples of a pure language, that they may all call upon the name of Jehovah, to serve him with one consent.
From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants, even the daughter of my dispersed, shall bring my offering.
In that day thou shall not be put to shame for all thy doings, in which thou have transgressed against me. For then I will take away out of the midst of thee those who rejoice in thy pride, and thou shall no more be haughty in my holy mountain.
But I will leave in the midst of thee an afflicted and poor people, and they shall take refuge in the name of Jehovah.
The remnant of Israel shall not do iniquity, nor speak lies, nor shall a deceitful tongue be found in their mouth. For they shall feed and lie down, and none shall make them afraid.
Sing, O daughter of Zion. Shout, O Israel. Be glad and rejoice with all the heart, O daughter of Jerusalem.
Jehovah has taken away thy judgments. He has cast out thine enemy. The King of Israel, even Jehovah, is in the midst of thee. Thou shall not fear evil any more.
In that day it shall be said to Jerusalem, Fear thou not, O Zion. Let not thy hands be slack.
Jehovah thy God is in the midst of thee, a mighty one who will save. He will rejoice over thee with joy. He will rest in his love. He will joy over thee with singing.
I will gather those who sorrow for the solemn assembly, who were of thee, to whom the burden upon her was a reproach.
Behold, at that time I will deal with all those who afflict thee. And I will save that which is lame, and gather that which was driven away, and I will make them a praise and a name, whose shame has been in all the earth.
At that time I will bring you in, and at that time I will gather you. For I will make you a name and a praise among all the peoples of the earth when I bring back your captivity before your eyes, says Jehovah.

Haggai

In the second year of Darius the king, in the sixth month, in the first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came by Haggai the prophet to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, saying,
Thus speaks Jehovah of hosts, saying, This people say, It is not the time for us to come, the time for Jehovah's house to be built.
Then the word of Jehovah came by Haggai the prophet, saying,
Is it a time for you yourselves to dwell in your paneled houses while this house lies waste?
Consider your ways.
Ye have sown much, and bring in little. Ye eat, but ye have not enough. Ye drink, but ye are not filled with drink. Ye clothe yourselves, but there is none warm. And he who earns wages earns wages to put into a bag with holes.
Consider your ways.
Go up to the mountain, and bring wood, and build the house. And I will take pleasure in it, and I will be glorified, says Jehovah.
Ye looked for much, and, lo, it came to little, and when ye brought it home, I blew upon it. Why? says Jehovah of hosts. Because of my house that lays waste while ye run each man to his own house.
Therefore for your sake the heavens withhold the dew, and the earth withholds its fruit.
And I called for a drought upon the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the grain, and upon the new wine, and upon the oil, and upon that which the ground brings forth, and upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labor of the hands.
Then Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, with all the remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of Jehovah their God, and the words of Haggai the prophet, as Jehovah their God had sent him. And the people feared before Jehovah.
Then Haggai, Jehovah's agent, spoke in Jehovah's message to the people, saying, I am with you, says Jehovah.
And Jehovah stirred up the spirit of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people. And they came and did work on the house of Jehovah of hosts, their God,
in the twenty-fourth day of the month, in the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.

In the seventh month, in the twenty-first day of the month, the word of Jehovah came by Haggai the prophet, saying,
Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and to the remnant of the people, saying,
Who is left among you that saw this house in its former glory? And how do ye see it now? Is it not in your eyes as nothing?
Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel, says Jehovah, and be strong, O Joshua, son of Jehozadak, the high priest, and be strong, all ye people of the land, says Jehovah, and work. For I am with you, says Jehovah of hosts,
according to the word that I covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, and my Spirit abode among you. Fear ye not.
Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the sea, and the dry land.
And I will shake all nations, and the precious things of all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says Jehovah of hosts.
The silver is mine, and the gold is mine, says Jehovah of hosts.
The latter glory of this house shall be greater than the former, says Jehovah of hosts, and in this place I will give peace, says Jehovah of hosts.
In the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of Jehovah came by Haggai the prophet, saying,
Ask now the priests concerning the law, saying,
If a man bears holy flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt touches bread, or pottage, or wine, or oil, or any food, shall it become holy? And the priests answered and said, No.
Then Haggai said, If a man who is unclean because of a dead body touches any of these, shall it be unclean? And the priests answered and said, It shall be unclean.
Then Haggai answered and said, So is this people, and so is this nation before me, says Jehovah, and so is every work of their hands. And that which they offer there is unclean.
And now, I pray you, consider from this day and backward, before a stone was laid upon a stone in the temple of Jehovah.
Through all that time, when a man came to a heap of twenty measures, there were but ten. When he came to the wine vat to draw out fifty vessels, there were but twenty.
I smote you with blasting and with mildew and with hail in all the work of your hands, yet ye turned not to me, says Jehovah.
Consider, I pray you, from this day and backward, from the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month, since the day that the foundation of Jehovah's temple was laid, consider it.
Is the seed yet in the barn? Yea, the vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive tree have not brought forth. From this day I will bless you.
And the word of Jehovah came the second time to Haggai in the twenty-fourth day of the month, saying,
Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of Judah, saying, I will shake the heavens and the earth.
And I will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the nations. And I will overthrow the chariots, and those who ride in them. And the horses and their riders shall come down, each one by the sword of his brother.
In that day, says Jehovah of hosts, I will take thee, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel, says Jehovah, and will make thee as a signet. For I have chosen thee, says Jehovah of hosts.

Zechariah

In the eighth month, in the second year of Darius, the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo, the prophet, saying,
Jehovah was greatly displeased with your fathers.
Return to me, says Jehovah of hosts, and I will return to you, says Jehovah of hosts.
Return ye now from your evil ways, and from your evil doings, but they did not hear, nor hearken to me, says Jehovah.
Your fathers, where are they? And the prophets, do they live forever?
But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the prophets, did they not overtake your fathers? And they turned and said, Like as Jehovah of hosts thought to do to us, according to our ways, and according to our doings, so he has dealt with us.
Upon the twenty-fourth day of the eleventh month, which is the month Shebat, in the second year of Darius, the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah the son of Berechiah, the son of Iddo, the prophet, saying,
I saw in the night, and, behold, a man riding upon a red horse, and he stood among the myrtle trees that were in the bottom. And behind him there were horses, red, sorrel, and white.
Then I said, O my lord, what are these? And the agent who talked with me said to me, I will show thee what these are.
And the man who stood among the myrtle trees answered and said, These are they whom Jehovah has sent to walk to and fro through the earth.
And they answered the agent of Jehovah who stood among the myrtle trees, and said, We have walked to and fro through the earth, and, behold, all the earth sits still, and is at rest.
Then the agent of Jehovah answered and said, O Jehovah of hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem and on the cities of Judah, against which thou have had indignation these seventy years?
And Jehovah answered the agent who talked with me with good words, comforting words.
I am jealous for Jerusalem and for Zion with a great jealousy.
And I am very greatly displeased with the nations that are at ease. For I was but a little displeased, and they helped forward the affliction.
I have returned to Jerusalem with mercies. My house shall be built in it, says Jehovah of hosts, and a line shall be stretched forth over Jerusalem.
My cities shall yet overflow with prosperity, and Jehovah shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.
And I lifted up my eyes, and saw, and, behold, four horns.
And I said to the agent who talked with me, What are these? And he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem.
And Jehovah showed me four smiths.
Then I said, What are these coming to do? And he spoke, saying, These are the horns which scattered Judah, so that no man lifted up his head. But these have come to terrify them, to cast down the horns of the nations, which lifted up their horn against the land of Judah to scatter it.

And I lifted up my eyes, and looked. And, behold, a man with a measuring line in his hand.
Then I said, Where do thou go? And he said to me, To measure Jerusalem. To see what is the breadth of it, and what is the length of it.
And, behold, the agent who talked with me went forth. And another agent went out to meet him,
and said to him, Run, speak to this young man, saying, Jerusalem shall be inhabited as villages without walls, because of the multitude of men and cattle therein.
For I, says Jehovah, will be to her a wall of fire round about, and I will be the glory in the midst of her.
Ho, ho, flee from the land of the north, says Jehovah. For I have spread you abroad as the four winds of the heavens, says Jehovah.
Ho Zion, escape, thou who dwell with the daughter of Babylon.
After glory he has sent me to the nations which plundered you. For he who touches you touches the apple of his eye.
For, behold, I will shake my hand over them, and they shall be a spoil to those who served them. And ye shall know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me.
Sing and rejoice, O daughter of Zion, for, lo, I come, and I will dwell in the midst of thee, says Jehovah.
And many nations shall join themselves to Jehovah in that day, and shall be my people, and I will dwell in the midst of thee. And thou shall know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me to thee.
And Jehovah shall inherit Judah as his portion in the holy land, and shall yet choose Jerusalem.
Be silent, all flesh, before Jehovah, for he has arisen out of his holy habitation.

And he showed me Joshua the high priest standing before the agent of Jehovah, and Satan standing at his right hand to be his adversary.
And Jehovah said to Satan, Jehovah rebuke thee, O Satan. Yea, Jehovah who has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee. Is this not a brand plucked out of the fire?
Now Joshua was clothed with filthy garments, and was standing before the agent.
And he answered and spoke to those who stood before him, saying, Take the filthy garments from off him. And to him he said, Behold, I have caused thine iniquity to pass from thee, and I will clothe thee with rich apparel.
And I said, Let them set a clean miter upon his head. So they set a clean miter upon his head, and clothed him with garments. And the agent of Jehovah was standing by.
And the agent of Jehovah testified to Joshua, saying,
If thou will walk in my ways, and if thou will keep my charge, then thou also shall judge my house, and shall also keep my courts, and I will give thee a place of access among these who stand by.
Hear now, O Joshua the high priest, thou and thy fellows who sit before thee, for they are men who are a sign. For, behold, I will bring forth my servant the Branch.
For, behold, the stone that I have set before Joshua. Upon one stone are seven eyes. Behold, I will engrave the graving of it, says Jehovah of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of that land in one day.
In that day, says Jehovah of hosts, ye shall invite each man his neighbor under the vine and under the fig tree.

And the agent who talked with me came again, and awoke me, as a man who is awakened out of his sleep.
And he said to me, What do thou see? And I said, I have seen, and, behold, a lampstand all of gold, with its bowl upon the top of it, and its seven lamps on it. There are seven pipes to each of the lamps, which are upon the top of it,
and two olive trees by it, one upon the right side of the bowl, and the other upon the left side of it.
And I answered and spoke to the agent who talked with me, saying, What are these, my lord?
Then the agent who talked with me answered and said to me, Do thou not know what these are? And I said, No, my lord.
Then he answered and spoke to me, saying, This is the word of Jehovah to Zerubbabel, saying, Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says Jehovah of hosts.
Who are thou, O great mountain? Before Zerubbabel thou shall become a plain, and he shall bring forth the top stone with shoutings of Grace, grace, to it.
Moreover the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house. His hands shall also finish it. And thou shall know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me to you.
For who has despised the day of small things? For these seven shall rejoice, and shall see the plummet in the hand of Zerubbabel, the eyes of Jehovah, which run to and fro through the whole earth.
Then I answered, and said to him, What are these two olive trees upon the right side of the lampstand and upon the left side of it?
And I answered the second time, and said to him, What are these two olive-branches, which are beside the two golden spouts that empty the golden oil out of themselves?
And he answered me and said, Do thou not know what these are? And I said, No, my lord.
Then he said, These are the two anointed ones, who stand by the Lord of the whole earth.

Then again I lifted up my eyes, and saw, and, behold, a flying roll.
And he said to me, What do thou see? And I answered, I see a flying roll. The length of it is twenty cubits, and the breadth of it ten cubits.
Then he said to me, This is the curse that goes forth over the face of the whole land. For everyone who steals shall be cut off on the one side according to it, and everyone who swears shall be cut off on the other side according to it.
I will cause it to go forth, says Jehovah of hosts, and it shall enter into the house of the thief, and into the house of him who swears falsely by my name. And it shall abide in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof and the stones thereof.
Then the agent who talked with me went forth, and said to me, Lift up now thine eyes, and see what this is that goes forth.
And I said, What is it? And he said, This is the ephah that goes forth. He said moreover, This is their appearance in all the land
(and, behold, a talent of lead was lifted up), and this is a woman sitting in the midst of the ephah.
And he said, This is Wickedness. And he cast her down into the midst of the ephah, and he cast the weight of lead upon the mouth of it.
Then I lifted up my eyes, and looked. And, behold, there came forth two women, and the wind was in their wings. Now they had wings like the wings of a stork, and they lifted up the ephah between earth and heaven.
Then I said to the agent who talked with me, Where do these carry the ephah?
And he said to me, To build her a house in the land of Shinar. And when it is prepared, she shall be set there in her own place.

And again I lifted up my eyes, and looked. And, behold, there came four chariots out from between two mountains, and the mountains were mountains of brass.
In the first chariot were red horses, and in the second chariot black horses,
and in the third chariot white horses, and in the fourth chariot strong grizzled horses.
Then I answered and said to the agent who talked with me, What are these, my lord?
And the agent answered and said to me, These are the four winds of heaven, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth.
The chariot in which are the black horses goes forth toward the north country, and the white went forth after them, and the grizzled went forth toward the south country.
And the strong ones went forth, and sought to go that they might walk to and fro through the earth. And he said, Get you from here. Walk to and fro through the earth. So they walked to and fro through the earth.
Then he cried to me, and spoke to me, saying, Behold, those who go toward the north country have quieted my spirit in the north country.
And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying,
Take from those of the captivity, even of Heldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedaiah, and come thou the same day, and go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah, where they have come from Babylon.
Yea, take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest.
And speak to him, saying, Thus speaks Jehovah of hosts, saying, Behold, the man whose name is the Branch. And he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of Jehovah,
even he shall build the temple of Jehovah. And he shall bear the glory, and shall sit and rule upon his throne. And he shall be a priest upon his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both.
And the crowns shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Jedaiah, and to Hen the son of Zephaniah, for a memorial in the temple of Jehovah.
And those who are far off shall come and build in the temple of Jehovah. And ye shall know that Jehovah of hosts has sent me to you. And this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently obey the voice of Jehovah your God.

And it came to pass in the fourth year of king Darius, that the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth month, even in Chislev.
Now those of Bethel had sent Sharezer and Regem-melech, and their men, to entreat the favor of Jehovah,
and to speak to the priests of the house of Jehovah of hosts, and to the prophets, saying, Should I weep in the fifth month, separating myself, as I have done these so many years?
Then the word of Jehovah of hosts came to me, saying,
Speak to all the people of the land, and to the priests, saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth and in the seventh month, even these seventy years, did ye at all fast to me, even to me?
And when ye eat, and when ye drink, do ye not eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves?
Should ye not hear the words which Jehovah cried by the former prophets, when Jerusalem was inhabited and in prosperity, and the cities thereof round about her, and the South and the lowland were inhabited?
And the word of Jehovah came to Zechariah, saying,
Thus Jehovah of hosts has spoken, saying, Execute true justice, and show kindness and compassion every man to his brother.
And do not oppress the widow, nor the fatherless, the sojourner, nor the poor man. And let none of you devise evil against his brother in your heart.
But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears, that they might not hear.
Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, lest they should hear the law, and the words which Jehovah of hosts had sent by his Spirit by the former prophets. Therefore great wrath came from Jehovah of hosts.
And it has come to pass that, as he cried, and they would not hear, so they shall cry, and I will not hear, said Jehovah of hosts.
But I will scatter them with a whirlwind among all the nations which they have not known. Thus the land was desolate after them, so that no man passed through nor returned. For they laid the pleasant land desolate.

And the word of Jehovah of hosts came to me, saying,
I am jealous for Zion with great jealousy, and I am jealous for her with great wrath.
I am returned to Zion, and will dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. And Jerusalem shall be called The city of truth, and the mountain of Jehovah of hosts, The holy mountain.
There shall yet old men and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, every man with his staff in his hand for very age.
And the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets of it.
If it is marvelous in the eyes of the remnant of this people in those days, should it also be marvelous in my eyes? says Jehovah of hosts.
Behold, I will save my people from the east country, and from the west country.
And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Jerusalem. And they shall be my people, and I will be their God, in truth and in righteousness.
Let your hands be strong, ye who hear in these days these words from the mouth of the prophets who were in the day that the foundation of the house of Jehovah of hosts was laid, even the temple, that it might be built.
For before those days there was no wage for man, nor any wage for beast, nor was there any peace to him who went out or came in, because of the adversary. For I set all men each one against his neighbor.
But now I will not be to the remnant of this people as in the former days, says Jehovah of hosts.
For there shall be the seed of peace. The vine shall give its fruit, and the ground shall give its increase, and the heavens shall give their dew. And I will cause the remnant of this people to inherit all these things.
And it shall come to pass that, as ye were a curse among the nations, O house of Judah and house of Israel, so I will save you, and ye shall be a blessing. Fear not. Let your hands be strong.
As I thought to do evil to you, when your fathers provoked me to wrath, says Jehovah of hosts, and I did not relent,
so again I have thought in these days to do good to Jerusalem and to the house of Judah. Fear ye not.
Speak ye every man the truth with his neighbor. Execute the judgment of truth and peace in your gates.
And let none of you devise evil in your hearts against his neighbor, and love no false oath. For all these are things that I hate, says Jehovah.
And the word of Jehovah of hosts came to me, saying,
The fast of the fourth month, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Judah, joy and gladness, and cheerful feasts. Therefore love truth and peace.
Peoples shall yet come, and the inhabitants of many cities.
And the inhabitants of one city shall go to another, saying, Let us go speedily to entreat the favor of Jehovah, and to seek Jehovah of hosts. I will go also.
Yea, many peoples and strong nations shall come to seek Jehovah of hosts in Jerusalem, and to entreat the favor of Jehovah.
In those days, ten men shall take hold, out of all the languages of the nations, they shall take hold of the skirt of him who is a Jew, saying, We will go with you, for we have heard that God is with you.

The burden of the word of Jehovah upon the land of Hadrach, and Damascus its resting-place (for the eye of man and of all the tribes of Israel is toward Jehovah),
and also Hamath, which borders on it, Tyre and Sidon, because they are very wise.
And Tyre built herself a stronghold, and heaped up silver as the dust, and fine gold as the mire of the streets.
Behold, the Lord will dispossess her, and he will smite her power in the sea, and she shall be devoured with fire.
Ashkelon shall see it, and fear, Gaza also, and shall be greatly pained, and Ekron, for her expectation shall be put to shame. And the king shall perish from Gaza, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited.
And a bastard shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistines.
And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from between his teeth. And he also shall be a remnant for our God, and he shall be as a chieftain in Judah, and Ekron as a Jebusite.
And I will encamp the army around my house, that none pass through or return, and no oppressor shall pass through them any more. For now I have seen with my eyes.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion. Shout, O daughter of Jerusalem. Behold, thy king comes to thee. He is just, and having salvation, lowly, and riding upon a donkey, even upon a colt the foal of a donkey.
And I will cut off the chariot from Ephraim, and the horse from Jerusalem, and the battle bow shall be cut off. And he shall speak peace to the nations. And his dominion shall be from sea to sea, and from the River to the ends of the earth.
As for thee also, because of the blood of thy covenant I have set free thy prisoners from the pit in which is no water.
Turn you back to the stronghold, ye prisoners of hope. Even today I declare that I will render double to thee.
For I have bent Judah for me. I have filled the bow with Ephraim. And I will stir up thy sons, O Zion, against thy sons, O Greece, and will make thee as the sword of a mighty man.
And Jehovah shall be seen over them. And his arrow shall go forth as the lightning. And the lord Jehovah will blow the trumpet, and will go with whirlwinds of the south.
Jehovah of hosts will defend them. And they shall devour, and shall tread down the sling-stones. And they shall drink, and make a noise as through wine, and they shall be filled like bowls, like the corners of the altar.
And Jehovah their God will save them in that day as the flock of his people, as for the stones of a crown, lifted on high over his land.
For how great is his goodness, and how great is his beauty! Grain shall make the young men flourish, and new wine the virgins.

Ask ye of Jehovah rain in the time of the latter rain, even of Jehovah who makes lightnings, and he will give them showers of rain, to everyone grass in the field.
For the teraphim have spoken vanity, and the diviners have seen a lie, and they have told false dreams. They comfort in vain. Therefore they go their way like sheep. They are afflicted, because there is no shepherd.
My anger is kindled against the shepherds, and I will punish the he-goats. For Jehovah of hosts has visited his flock, the house of Judah, and will make them as his goodly horse in the battle.
From him shall come forth the cornerstone, from him the nail, from him the battle bow, from him every ruler together.
And they shall be as mighty men, treading down their enemies in the mire of the streets in the battle. And they shall fight, because Jehovah is with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded.
And I will strengthen the house of Judah, and I will save the house of Joseph, and I will bring them back. For I have mercy upon them, and they shall be as though I had not cast them off. For I am Jehovah their God, and I will hear them.
And Ephraim shall be like a mighty man, and their heart shall rejoice as through wine. Yea, their sons shall see it, and rejoice. Their heart shall be glad in Jehovah.
I will whistle for them, and gather them. For I have redeemed them, and they shall increase as they have increased.
And I will sow them among the peoples, and they shall remember me in far countries. And they shall live with their sons, and shall return.
I will also bring them again out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Assyria. And I will bring them into the land of Gilead and Lebanon, and until space shall not be found for them.
And he will pass through the sea of affliction, and will smite the waves in the sea, and all the depths of the Nile shall dry up. And the pride of Assyria shall be brought down, and the scepter of Egypt shall depart.
And I will strengthen them in Jehovah, and they shall walk up and down in his name, says Jehovah.

Open thy doors, O Lebanon, that the fire may devour thy cedars.
Wail, O fir tree, for the cedar is fallen, because the fine ones are destroyed. Wail, O ye oaks of Bashan, for the strong forest has come down.
A voice of the wailing of the shepherds, for their glory is destroyed. A voice of the roaring of young lions, for the pride of the Jordan is laid waste.
Feed the flock of slaughter,
whose possessors kill them, and hold themselves not guilty. And those who sell them say, Blessed be Jehovah, for I am rich, and their own shepherds pity them not.
For I will no more pity the inhabitants of the land, says Jehovah. But, lo, I will deliver the men each one into his neighbor's hand, and into the hand of his king. And they shall smite the land, and I will not deliver them out of their hand.
So I fed the flock of slaughter, truly the poor of the flock. And I took to me two staves, the one I called Beauty, and the other I called Bands, and I fed the flock.
And I cut off the three shepherds in one month, for my soul was weary of them, and their soul also loathed me.
Then I said, I will not feed you. That which dies, let it die, and that which is to be cut off, let it be cut off, and let those who are left eat each one the flesh of another.
And I took my staff Beauty, and cut it apart, that I might break my covenant which I had made with all the peoples.
And it was broken in that day, and thus the poor of the flock who gave heed to me knew that it was the word of Jehovah.
And I said to them, If ye think good, give me my wage, and if not, forbear. So they weighed for my wage thirty pieces of silver.
And Jehovah said to me, Cast it to the potter, the good price that I was valued by them. And I took the thirty pieces of silver, and cast them to the potter in the house of Jehovah.
Then I cut apart my other staff, even Bands, that I might break the brotherhood between Judah and Israel.
And Jehovah said to me, Take to thee yet again the instruments of a foolish shepherd.
For, lo, I will raise up a shepherd in the land, who will not visit those who are cut off, nor will he seek those who are scattered, nor heal that which is broken, nor feed that which is sound, but he will eat the flesh of the fat, and will tear their hoofs in pieces.
Woe to the worthless shepherd who leaves the flock! The sword shall be upon his arm, and upon his right eye. His arm shall be entirely dried up, and his right eye shall be utterly darkened.

Behold, I will make Jerusalem a cup of reeling to all the peoples round about, and upon Judah also it shall be in the siege against Jerusalem.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will make Jerusalem a burdensome stone for all the peoples. All who burden themselves with it shall be severely wounded. And all the nations of the earth shall be gathered together against it.
In that day, says Jehovah, I will smite every horse with terror, and his rider with madness. And I will open my eyes upon the house of Judah, and will smite every horse of the peoples with blindness.
And the chieftains of Judah shall say in their heart, The inhabitants of Jerusalem are my strength in Jehovah of hosts their God.
In that day I will make the chieftains of Judah like a pan of fire among wood, and like a flaming torch among sheaves. And they shall devour all the peoples round about, on the right hand and on the left, and Jerusalem shall yet again dwell in their own place, even in Jerusalem.
Jehovah also shall save the tents of Judah first, that the glory of the house of David and the glory of the inhabitants of Jerusalem not be magnified above Judah.
In that day Jehovah shall defend the inhabitants of Jerusalem. And he who is feeble among them at that day shall be as David, and the house of David shall be as God, as the agent of Jehovah before them.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that I will seek to destroy all the nations that come against Jerusalem.
And I will pour upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and of supplication. And they shall look to me whom they have pierced. And they shall mourn for him, as a man mourns for his only son, and shall be in bitterness for him, as a man who is in bitterness for his firstborn.
In that day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon.
And the land shall mourn, every family apart, the family of the house of David apart, and their wives apart, the family of the house of Nathan apart, and their wives apart,
the family of the house of Levi apart, and their wives apart, the family of the Shimeites apart, and their wives apart,
all the families that remain, every family apart, and their wives apart.

In that day there shall be a fountain opened to the house of David and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, for sin and for uncleanness.
And it shall come to pass in that day, says Jehovah of hosts, that I will cut off the names of the idols out of the land, and they shall no more be remembered. And I will also cause the prophets and the unclean spirit to pass out of the land.
And it shall come to pass that, when any shall yet prophesy, then his father and his mother who begot him shall say to him, Thou shall not live, for thou speak lies in the name of Jehovah. And his father and his mother who begot him shall thrust him through when he prophesies.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that the prophets shall be ashamed each one of his vision, when he prophesies, nor shall they wear a hairy mantle to deceive.
But he shall say, I am no prophet. I am a tiller of the ground, for I have been made a bondman from my youth.
And a man shall say to him, What are these wounds between thine arms? Then he shall answer, Those with which I was wounded in the house of my friends.
Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man who is my companion, says Jehovah of hosts. Smite the shepherd, and the sheep shall be scattered. And I will turn my hand upon the little ones.
And it shall come to pass, that in all the land, says Jehovah, two parts therein shall be cut off and die, but the third shall be left in it.
And I will bring the third part into the fire, and will refine them as silver is refined, and will try them as gold is tried. They shall call on my name, and I will hear them. I will say, It is my people, and they shall say, Jehovah is my God.

Behold, a day of Jehovah comes when thy spoil shall be divided in the midst of thee.
For I will gather all nations against Jerusalem to battle. And the city shall be taken, and the houses rifled, and the women ravished, and half of the city shall go forth into captivity. And the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the city.
Then Jehovah shall go forth, and fight against those nations, as when he fought in the day of battle.
And his feet shall stand in that day upon the mount of Olives, which is before Jerusalem on the east. And the mount of Olives shall be split in the midst of it toward the east and toward the west, a very great valley. And half of the mountain shall remove toward the north, and half of it toward the south.
And ye shall flee by the valley of my mountains, for the valley of the mountains shall reach to Azel. Yea, ye shall flee, just as ye fled from before the earthquake in the days of Uzziah king of Judah. And Jehovah my God shall come, and all the holy ones with thee.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that there shall not be light; the bright ones shall withdraw themselves.
But it shall be one day which is known to Jehovah, not day, and not night. But it shall come to pass, that at evening time there shall be light.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that living waters shall go out from Jerusalem, half of them toward the eastern sea, and half of them toward the western sea. In summer and in winter it shall be.
And Jehovah shall be King over all the earth. In that day Jehovah shall be one, and his name one.
All the land shall be made like the Arabah, from Geba to Rimmon south of Jerusalem. And she shall be lifted up, and shall dwell in her place, from Benjamin's gate to the place of the first gate, to the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananel to the king's wine-presses.
And men shall dwell therein, and there shall be no more curse, but Jerusalem shall dwell safely.
their flesh shall consume away while they stand upon their feet, and their eyes shall consume away in their sockets, and their tongue shall consume away in their mouth.
And it shall come to pass in that day, that a great tumult from Jehovah shall be among them, and they shall lay hold each one on the hand of his neighbor, and his hand shall rise up against the hand of his neighbor.
And Judah also shall fight at Jerusalem. And the wealth of all the nations round about shall be gathered together, gold, and silver, and apparel, in great abundance.
And so shall be the plague of the horse, of the mule, of the camel, and of the donkey, and of all the beasts that shall be in those camps, as that plague.
And it shall come to pass, that everyone who is left of all the nations that came against Jerusalem shall go up from year to year to worship the King, Jehovah of hosts, and to keep the feast of tabernacles.
And it shall be, that of the families of the earth he who does not go up to Jerusalem to worship the King, Jehovah of hosts, upon them there shall be no rain.
And if the family of Egypt does not go up, and does not come, that there shall be the plague with which Jehovah will smite the nations that go not up to keep the feast of tabernacles.
This shall be the punishment of Egypt, and the punishment of all the nations that do not go up to keep the feast of tabernacles.
In that day there shall be upon the bells of the horses, HOLY TO JEHOVAH, and the pots in Jehovah's house shall be like the bowls before the altar.
Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holy to Jehovah of hosts. And all those who sacrifice shall come and take of them, and boil in it. And in that day there shall be no more a Canaanite in the house of Jehovah of hosts.

Malachi

The burden of the word of Jehovah to Israel by Malachi.
I have loved you, says Jehovah. Yet ye say, How have thou loved us? Was not Esau Jacob's brother, says Jehovah. Yet I loved Jacob,
but Esau I regarded inferior, and made his mountains a desolation, and gave his heritage to the jackals of the wilderness.
They shall build, but I will throw down, and men shall call them the border of wickedness, and the people against whom Jehovah has indignation forever.
And your eyes shall see, and ye shall say, Jehovah be magnified beyond the border of Israel.
A son honors his father, and a servant his master. If then I am a father, where is my honor? And if I am a master, where is my fear? says Jehovah of hosts to you, O priests, who despise my name. And ye say, How have we despised thy name?
Ye offer polluted bread upon my altar. And ye say, How have we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of Jehovah is contemptible.
And when ye offer the blind for sacrifice, ye say, It is no evil! and when ye offer the lame and sick, It is no evil! Present it now to thy governor. Will he be pleased with thee, or will he accept thy person? says Jehovah of hosts.
Ye say, And now, I pray you, entreat the favor of God, that he may be gracious to us; this has been by your means. Will he accept any of your persons? says Jehovah of hosts.
Oh that there was among you who would shut the doors, that ye might not kindle my altar in vain! I have no pleasure in you, says Jehovah of hosts, nor will I accept an offering at your hand.
For from the rising of the sun even to the going down of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles. And in every place incense is offered to my name, and a pure offering. For my name is great among the Gentiles, says Jehovah of hosts.
But ye profane it, in that ye say, The table of Jehovah is polluted. And the fruit of it, even its food, is contemptible.
Ye also say, Behold, what a weariness it is! And ye have sniffed at it, says Jehovah of hosts. And ye have brought that which was taken by violence, and the lame, and the sick. Thus ye bring the offering. Should I accept this at your hand? says Jehovah.
But cursed be the deceiver, who has in his flock a male, and vows, and sacrifices to the Lord a blemished thing. For I am a great King, says Jehovah of hosts, and my name is feared among the Gentiles.

And now, O ye priests, this commandment is for you.
If ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to heart, to give glory to my name, says Jehovah of hosts, then I will send the curse upon you, and I will curse your blessings. Yea, I have cursed them already, because ye do not lay it to heart.
Behold, I will rebuke your seed, and will spread dung upon your faces, even the dung of your feasts, and ye shall be taken away with it.
And ye shall know that I have sent this commandment to you, that my covenant may be with Levi, says Jehovah of hosts.
My covenant of life and peace was with him. And I gave them to him that he might fear, and he feared me, and stood in awe of my name.
The law of truth was in his mouth, and unrighteousness was not found in his lips. He walked with me in peace and uprightness, and turned many away from iniquity.
For the priest's lips should keep knowledge, and they should seek the law at his mouth. For he is the messenger of Jehovah of hosts.
But ye are turned aside out of the way. Ye have caused many to stumble in the law. Ye have corrupted the covenant of Levi, says Jehovah of hosts.
Therefore I also have made you contemptible and base before all the people, according as ye have not kept my ways, but have had respect of persons in the law.
Have we not all one father? Has not one God created us? Why do we deal treacherously every man against his brother, profaning the covenant of our fathers?
Judah has dealt treacherously, and an abomination is committed in Israel and in Jerusalem. For Judah has profaned the holiness of Jehovah which he loves, and has married the daughter of a foreign god.
him who wakes, and him who answers, and him who offers an offering to Jehovah of hosts.
Ye cover the altar of Jehovah with tears, with weeping, and with sighing, insomuch that he does not regard the offering any more, nor receives it with good will at your hand.
Yet ye say, Why? Because Jehovah has been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have dealt treacherously, though she is thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant.
And did he not make one, although he had the residue of the Spirit? And why one? He sought a godly seed. Therefore take heed to your spirit, and let none deal treacherously against the wife of his youth.
For I hate putting away, says Jehovah, the God of Israel, and him who covers his garment with violence, says Jehovah of hosts. Therefore take heed to your spirit, that ye deal not treacherously.
Ye have wearied Jehovah with your words. Yet ye say, How have we wearied him? In that ye say, Everyone who does evil is good in the sight of Jehovah, and he delights in them, or Where is the God of justice?

Behold, I send my agent, and he shall prepare the way before me. And the Lord, whom ye seek, will suddenly come to his temple. And the messenger of the covenant, whom ye desire, behold, he comes, says Jehovah of hosts.
But who can abide the day of his coming? And who shall stand when he appears? For he is like a refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap.
And he will sit as a refiner and purifier of silver. And he will purify the sons of Levi, and refine them as gold and silver. And they shall offer to Jehovah offerings in righteousness.
Then the offering of Judah and Jerusalem shall be pleasant to Jehovah, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.
And I will come near to you to judgment, and I will be a swift witness against the sorcerers, and against the adulterers, and against the false swearers, and against those who oppress the hireling in his wages, the widow, and the fatherless, and who turn aside the sojourner, and do not fear me, says Jehovah of hosts.
For I, Jehovah, do not change. Therefore ye, O sons of Jacob, are not consumed.
From the days of your fathers ye have turned aside from my ordinances, and have not kept them. Return to me, and I will return to you, says Jehovah of hosts. But ye say, How shall we return?
Will a man rob God? Yet ye rob me. But ye say, How have we robbed thee? In tithes and offerings.
Ye are cursed with the curse, for ye rob me, even this whole nation.
Bring ye the whole tithe into the storehouse, that there may be food in my house, and prove me now with this, says Jehovah of hosts, if I will not open to you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough for it.
And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruits of your ground, nor shall your vine cast its fruit before the time in the field, says Jehovah of hosts.
And all nations shall call you blessed, for ye shall be a delightful land, says Jehovah of hosts.
Your words have been stout against me, says Jehovah. Yet ye say, What have we spoken against thee?
Ye have said, It is vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept his charge, and that we have walked mournfully before Jehovah of hosts?
And now we call the proud happy. Yea, those who work wickedness are built up. Yea, they challenge God, and escape.
Then those who feared Jehovah spoke one with another, and Jehovah hearkened, and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before him, for those who feared Jehovah, and who thought upon his name.
And they shall be mine, says Jehovah of hosts, my own possession, in the day that I make. And I will spare them, as a man spares his own son who serves him.
Then ye shall return and discern between the righteous man and the wicked man, between him who serves God and him who does not serve him.

For, behold, the day comes, it burns as a furnace, and all the proud, and all who work wickedness, shall be stubble. And the day that comes shall burn them up, says Jehovah of hosts, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch.
But to you who fear my name the sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in its wings, and ye shall go forth, and frolic as calves of the stall.
And ye shall tread down the wicked, for they shall be ashes under the soles of your feet in the day that I make, says Jehovah of hosts.
Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which I commanded to him in Horeb for all Israel, even statutes and ordinances.
Behold, I will send you Elijah the prophet before the great and fearful day of Jehovah comes.
And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the sons, and the heart of the sons to their fathers, lest I come and smite the earth with a curse.

Matthew

A book of a genealogy of Jesus Christ, the son of David, the son of Abraham.
Abraham begot Isaac, and Isaac begot Jacob, and Jacob begot Judah and his brothers,
and Judah begot Perez and Zerah from Tamar, and Perez begot Hezron, and Hezron begot Ram,
and Ram begot Amminadab, and Amminadab begot Nahshon, and Nahshon begot Salmon,
and Salmon begot Boaz from Rahab, and Boaz begot Obed from Ruth, and Obed begot Jesse,
and Jesse begot David the king. And David begot Solomon from the widow of Uriah,
and Solomon begot Rehoboam, and Rehoboam begot Abijah, and Abijah begot Asa,
and Asa begot Jehoshaphat, and Jehoshaphat begot Joram, and Joram begot Uzziah,
and Uzziah begot Jotham, and Jotham begot Ahaz, and Ahaz begot Hezekiah,
and Hezekiah begot Manasseh, and Manasseh begot Amon, and Amon begot Josiah,
and Josiah begot Jechoniah and his brothers during the Babylonian exile.
And after the Babylonian exile, Jechoniah begot Shealtiel, and Shealtiel begot Zerubbabel,
and Zerubbabel begot Abiud, and Abiud begot Eliakim, and Eliakim begot Azor,
and Azor begot Zadoc, and Zadoc begot Achim, and Achim begot Eliud,
and Eliud begot Eleazar, and Eleazar begot Matthan, and Matthan begot Jacob,
and Jacob begot Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus, who is called Christ.
So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen generations, and from David to the Babylonian exile fourteen generations, and from the Babylonian exile to the Christ fourteen generations.
Now the birth of Jesus Christ was this way. For his mother Mary, who was betrothed to Joseph, before they came together she was found having in her womb from the Holy Spirit.
But Joseph her husband, being a righteous man, and not wanting to expose her to public disgrace, intended to dismiss her privately.
But while he considered these things, behold, an agent of the Lord appeared to him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear not to take Mary to be thy wife, for that which was begotten in her is from the Holy Spirit.
And she will bring forth a son, and thou shall call his name JESUS, for he will save his people from their sins.
Now all this has come to pass, so that what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet might be fulfilled, which says,
Behold, the virgin will have in her womb, and will bring forth a son. And they will call his name Immanuel, which is, being interpreted, God with us.
And Joseph, being roused from his sleep, did as the agent of the Lord ordered him. And he took his wife,
and knew her not until she brought forth her son, the firstborn. And he called his name JESUS.

Now Jesus having been born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the king, behold, wise men from the east came to Jerusalem, saying,
Where is he who is born king of the Jews? For we saw his star in the east, and have come to worship him.
And Herod the king having heard it, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him.
And having gathered together all the chief priests and scholars of the people, he inquired of them where the Christ is born.
And they said to him, In Bethlehem of Judea. For thus it is written through the prophet,
And thou Bethlehem, land of Judah, are in no way least among the rulers of Judah, for out of thee will come forth a man who rules, who will tend my people Israel.
Then Herod having called the wise men privately, ascertained from them what time the star appeared.
And having sent them to Bethlehem, he said, After going, search diligently about the child. And when ye find him, report to me, so that I also having come, may worship him.
And when they heard the king, they departed. And lo, the star that they saw in the east went before them until, having come, it stood over where the child was.
And when they saw the star, they rejoiced with exceedingly great joy.
And having come into the house, they saw the child with Mary his mother, and having fallen down, they worshiped him. And having opened their treasures, they brought to him gifts, gold and frankincense and myrrh.
And divinely warned in a dream not to return to Herod, they departed into their own country by another way.
Now after they departed, behold, an agent of the Lord appears to Joseph in a dream, saying, After rising, take the child and his mother, and flee into Egypt, and thou be there until I tell thee, for Herod is going to seek the child to destroy it.
And having awakened, he took the child and his mother by night, and departed into Egypt.
And he was there until the end of Herod, so that what was spoken by the Lord through the prophet might be fulfilled, which says, Out of Egypt I called my Son.
Then Herod, when he saw that he was scorned by the wise men, was exceedingly angry, and having sent forth, he killed all the boys in Bethlehem, and in all the borders of it, from two years old and under, according to the time that he had ascertained from the wise men.
Then that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, which says,
A voice was heard in Ramah, lamentation, and weeping, and great mourning, Rachel weeping for her children. And she did not want to be comforted, because they are not.
But when Herod perished, behold, an agent of the Lord appears in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying,
After rising, take the child and his mother, and go into the land of Israel, for those seeking the child's life have died.
And having awaken, he took the child and his mother, and came into the land of Israel.
But when he heard that Archelaus was reigning over Judea in place of his father Herod, he was afraid to go there. And divinely warned in a dream, he withdrew into the parts of Galilee.
And having come, he dwelt in a city called Nazareth, so that what was spoken through the prophets might be fulfilled, that he will be called a Nazarene.

And in those days John the immerser comes, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, and saying,
Repent ye, for the kingdom of the heavens has approached.
Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.
Now John himself had his raiment of camel's hair, and a leather belt about his waist. And his food was locusts and wild honey.
Then Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region of the Jordan went out to him,
and they were immersed by him in the Jordan, confessing their sins.
But when he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees coming to his immersion, he said to them, Ye offspring of vipers, who showed you to flee from the coming wrath?
Therefore produce fruit worthy of repentance.
And think not to say within yourselves, We have a father, Abraham. For I say to you, that God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham.
And even now the axe is laid at the root of the trees. Every tree therefore not producing good fruit is cut down, and cast into the fire.
I indeed immerse you in water for repentance, but he who comes after me is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear. He will immerse you in the Holy Spirit.
Whose winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor. And he will gather his wheat into the storehouse, but he will burn the chaff with unquenchable fire.
Then Jesus comes from Galilee to the Jordan to John to be immersed by him.
But John was preventing him, saying, I have need to be immersed by thee, and thou come to me?
But having answered, Jesus said to him, Allow it now, for thus it is fitting for us to fulfill all righteousness. Then he allows him.
And when Jesus was immersed, he went up straightaway out of the water. And lo, the heavens were opened to him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove, and coming upon him.
And lo, a voice out of the heavens, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

Then Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted by the devil.
And having fasted forty days and forty nights, afterward he was hungry.
And after he who tempts came, he said to him, If thou are the Son of God, speak so that these stones may become bread.
But having answered, he said, It is written, Man will not live on bread alone, but on every word coming out through the mouth of God.
Then the devil takes him into the holy city, and stands him on the pinnacle of the temple.
And he says to him, If thou are the Son of God, cast thyself down, for it is written, He will command his agents about thee, and, They will take thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
Jesus said to him, Again it is written, Thou shall not challenge the Lord thy God.
Again, the devil takes him onto an exceedingly high mountain, and shows him all the kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them.
And he says to him, All these things I give thee, if after falling down, thou will worship me.
Then Jesus says to him, Get thee behind me, Satan, for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only thou shall serve.
Then the devil leaves him, and behold, agents came and served him.
Now when Jesus heard that John was delivered up, he departed into Galilee.
And having left Nazareth behind, after coming, he dwelt in Capernaum by the sea in the regions of Zebulun and Naphtali,
so that what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which says,
The land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, way of the sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles,
the people who dwell in darkness saw a great light, and to those who dwell in the region and shadow of death, light sprang up to them.
From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent ye, for the kingdom of the heavens has approached.
And walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers, Simon who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, casting a net into the sea, for they were fishermen.
And he says to them, Come behind me, and I will make you fishermen of men.
And straightaway having left the nets, they followed him.
And having gone on from there he saw two other brothers, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, in the boat with Zebedee their father, mending their nets. And he called them.
And straightaway having left the boat and their father, they followed him.
And Jesus went around all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the good news of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.
And his fame went forth into all Syria. And they brought to him all those faring badly with various diseases, and gripped with pain, and being demon-possessed, and being lunatic, and paralyzed. And he healed them.
And many multitudes from Galilee and Decapolis and Jerusalem and Judea and beyond the Jordan followed him.

And having seen the multitudes, he went up onto the mountain. And when he sat down, his disciples came to him.
And having opened his mouth, he taught them, saying,
Blessed are the poor in spirit, because the kingdom of the heavens is theirs.
Blessed are those who mourn, because they will be comforted.
Blessed are the meek, because they will inherit the earth.
Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness, because they will be filled.
Blessed are the merciful, because they will obtain mercy.
Blessed are the pure in heart, because they will see God.
Blessed are the peacemakers, because they will be called sons of God.
Blessed are those who have been persecuted because of righteousness, because the kingdom of the heavens is theirs.
Blessed are ye when they revile you, and persecute you, and say every evil word, being deceitful against you because of me.
Rejoice, and be exceedingly glad, because your reward is great in the heavens, for so they persecuted the prophets before you.
Ye are the salt material of the earth. But if the salt material becomes ineffective, by what will it be salted? It is potent for nothing further, except to be cast outside and to be trodden down by men.
Ye are the light of the world. A city setting on a hill cannot be hid,
nor do they light a lamp, and put it under the bushel, but on the lampstand, and it shines to all in the house.
Thus your light should shine before men, so that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father in the heavens.
Think not that I came to abolish the law or the prophets. I came not to abolish, but to fulfill.
For truly I say to you, until the heaven and the earth pass away, one iota or one tittle will, no, not pass away from the law, until all things come to pass.
Whoever therefore may relax one of these least commandments, and may teach men so, he will be called least in the kingdom of the heavens. But whoever may do and may teach them, this man will be called great in the kingdom of the heavens.
For I say to you, that unless your righteousness abounds more than of the scholars and Pharisees, ye will, no, not enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
Ye have heard that it was said to them in old times, Thou shall not murder, and whoever murders will be liable to the judgment.
But I say to you, that every man who is angry at his brother without cause will be liable to the judgment, and whoever speaks an insult to his brother will be liable to the council, and whoever says, Foolish man, will be liable to the hell of fire.
If therefore thou should bring thy gift to the altar, and remember there that thy brother has anything against thee,
leave there thy gift before the altar, and go. First be reconciled to thy brother, and then, after coming, bring thy gift.
Be agreeing with thine opponent quickly, while thou are with him on the way, lest the opponent deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the subordinate, and thou will be cast into prison.
Truly I say to thee, thou will, no, not come out from there, until thou have paid the last quadran.
Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shall not commit adultery.
But I say to you, that every man who looks on a woman to crave her has already committed adultery with her in his heart.
And if thy right eye causes thee to stumble, remove it and cast it from thee, for it is advantageous for thee that one of thy body-parts should perish, and not thy whole body be cast into hell.
And if thy right hand causes thee to stumble, cut it off and cast it from thee, for it is advantageous for thee that one of thy body-parts should perish, and not thy whole body be cast into hell.
And it was said, Whoever may divorce his wife, let him give her a divorce certificate.
But I say to you, that whoever may divorce his wife apart from a matter of fornication, disposes her to commit adultery, and whoever may marry her who has been divorced commits adultery.
Again, ye have heard that it was said to them in old times, Thou shall not swear falsely, but shall render to the Lord thine oaths.
But I say to you, not to swear at all, neither by heaven, because it is the throne of God,
nor by the earth, because it is the footstool of his feet, nor by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King.
Neither shall thou swear by thy head, because thou cannot make one hair white or black.
But let your word be, Yes, yes, No, no. And anything beyond these is from evil.
Ye have heard that it was said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth.
But I say to you, not to resist what is troublesome, but whoever will strike thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also.
And to the man who wants to sue thee, and take away thy coat, thou shall leave him thy cloak also.
And whoever will draft thee for one mile, go thou with him two.
Give to him who asks thee, and turn thou not away from him who wants to borrow from thee.
Ye have heard that it was said, Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy.
But I say to you, love your enemies, bless those who curse you, do good to those who hate you, and pray for those who mistreat you and persecute you,
so that ye may become sons of your Father in the heavens, because he makes his sun to rise on the evil and the good, and makes rain on the righteous and the unrighteous.
For if ye love those who love you, what reward have ye? Do not even the tax collectors the same?
And if ye only greet your friends, what do ye extra? Do not even the tax collectors this way?
Ye therefore shall be perfect, even as your Father in the heavens is perfect.

Be careful not to do your charity before men in order to be seen by them, otherwise ye have no reward from your Father in the heavens.
When therefore thou do charity, do not sound a trumpet before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets, so that they may have glory by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
But when thou do charity, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand does,
so that thy charity may be in secret. And thy Father who sees in secret will himself reward thee in the open.
And when thou pray, thou shall not be as the hypocrites, because they love to pray having stood in the synagogues and in the corners of the thoroughfares, so that they may be seen by men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
But thou, when thou pray, enter into thy private room, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father in secret, and thy Father who sees in secret will reward thee in the open.
And while praying do not use vain repetitions as the heathen do, for they think that they will be heard by their much speaking.
Be not therefore like them, for your Father knows what things ye have need of before ye ask him.
Our Father in the heavens, hallowed be thy name.
May thy kingdom come. May thy will happen on the earth as also in heaven.
Give us this day the bread sufficient for us.
And forgive us our debts as we also forgive our debtors.
And bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, because from thee is the kingdom and the power and the glory into the ages. Truly.
For if ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father will also forgive you.
But if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive your trespasses.
And when ye fast, become not like the gloomy looking hypocrites, for they make their faces unsightly, so that they may appear fasting to men. Truly I say to you, they have their reward.
But when thou fast, anoint thy head, and wash thy face,
so that thou may not appear fasting to men, but to thy Father in secret. And thy Father, who sees in secret, will reward thee.
Lay not up for yourselves treasures upon the earth, where moth and rust deteriorates, and where thieves break through and steal,
but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust deteriorates, and where thieves do not break through nor steal.
For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
The light of the body is the eye. If therefore thine eye is sound, thy whole body will be bright.
But if thine eye is bad, thy whole body will be dark. If therefore the light that is in thee is darkness, how great is the darkness!
No man can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one, and love the other, or he will hold to one, and disparage the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
Because of this I say to you, be not anxious about your life, what ye may eat, or what ye may drink, nor yet for your body, what ye may wear. Is not the life more than the food, and the body than the clothing?
Look to the birds of the sky, because they sow not, nor do they reap, nor gather into barns, and your heavenly Father feeds them. Are ye not more valuable then they?
And which man of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his life span?
And why are ye anxious about clothing? Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow. They toil not, nor do they spin,
yet I say to you, that not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed like one of these.
And if God so clothes the grass of the field, which today is, and tomorrow is cast into an oven, will he not much more you, O ye of little faith?
Be not therefore anxious, saying, What may we eat? or, What may we drink? or, What may we wear?
For the Gentiles seek after all these things, for your heavenly Father knows that ye need all these things.
But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things will be added to you.
Be not therefore anxious for the morrow, for the morrow will be anxious about things of itself. Sufficient for the day is the evil of it.

Do not criticize, that ye may not be criticized.
For by what criticism ye criticize, ye will be criticized, and by what measure ye measure, it will be measured to you.
And why do thou see the speck in thy brother's eye, but do not notice the beam in thine own eye?
Or how will thou say to thy brother, Let me take out the speck from thine eye, and behold, the beam in thine own eye?
Thou hypocrite, first take out the beam from thine own eye, and then thou will see clearly to take out the speck from thy brother's eye.
Do not give what is holy to the dogs, nor cast your pearls before the swine, lest they trample them by their feet, and having turn back may lacerate you.
Ask, and it will be given you. Seek, and ye will find. Knock, and it will be opened to you.
For every man who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it will be opened.
Or what man is there of you, who, if his son may ask for bread, will give him a stone,
and if he may ask for a fish, will give him a serpent?
If ye therefore, being evil, know to give good gifts to your children, how much more your Father in the heavens will give good things to those who ask him?
All things therefore, as many as ye may want that men should do to you, so also do ye to them, for this is the law and the prophets.
Enter ye in by the narrow gate, because wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leads to destruction, and many are they who enter through it.
How narrow is the gate, and restricted the way, that leads to life, and few are those who find it.
But beware of false prophets, who come to you in sheep's clothing, but inwardly are predatory wolves.
From their fruits ye will know them. Do they gather grapes from thorns, or figs from thistles?
Likewise every good tree produces good fruits, but the corrupt tree produces bad fruits.
A good tree cannot produce bad fruits, nor a corrupt tree produce good fruits.
Every tree not producing good fruit is cut down, and thrown into the fire.
So then from their fruits ye will know them.
Not every man who says to me, Lord, Lord, will enter into the kingdom of the heavens, but he who does the will of my Father in the heavens.
Many will say to me in that day, Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy by thy name, and by thy name cast out demons, and by thy name do many mighty works?
And then I will profess to them, I never acknowledged you. Depart from me, ye who work lawlessness.
Therefore every man, whoever hears these sayings of mine, and does them, I will compare him to a wise man who built his house upon the rock.
And the rain descended, and the torrents came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not, for it had been founded upon the rock.
And every man who hears these sayings of mine, and does not do them, will be compared to a foolish man who built his house upon the sand.
And the rain descended, and the torrents came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell. And great was the fall of it.
And it came to pass, when Jesus finished these sayings, the multitudes were astonished at his teaching,
for he was teaching them as having authority, and not as their scholars.

And upon his coming down from the mountain, many multitudes followed him.
And behold, a leper who came, worshiped him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can cleanse me.
And having reached out his hand, Jesus touched him, saying, I will, be thou cleansed. And straightaway his leprosy was cleansed.
And Jesus says to him, See thou speak to no man, but go, show thyself to the priest, and bring the gift that Moses commanded for a testimony to them.
And upon his entering into Capernaum, a centurion came to him, beseeching him,
and saying, Lord, my boy has been laid down in the house, paralyzed, extremely tormented.
And Jesus says to him, after coming I will heal him.
And having answered, the centurion said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof, but only speak the word, and my boy will be healed.
For I also am a man under authority, having soldiers under myself. And I say to this man, Go, and he goes, and to another, Come, and he comes, and to my bondman, Do this, and he does it.
And when Jesus heard it, he marveled, and said to those who followed, Truly I say to you, not even in Israel have I found such great faith.
And I say to you, that many will come from east and west, and will sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of the heavens,
but the sons of the kingdom will be cast out into the outer darkness. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
And Jesus said to the centurion, Go thou. And as thou have believed, be it done to thee. And his boy was healed in that hour.
And when Jesus came into Peter's house, he saw his mother-in-law, having been laid down, and feverish.
And he touched her hand, and the fever left her. And she was raised up, and served him.
And having become evening, they brought to him many being demon possessed. And he cast out the spirits by word, and healed all those faring badly,
so that what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which says, He himself took our infirmities, and bore our diseases.
Now when Jesus saw many multitudes around him, he commanded to depart to the other side.
And a certain scholar having come, he said to him, Teacher, I will follow thee wherever thou may go.
And Jesus says to him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky, nests, but the Son of man has nowhere he may lay his head.
And another of his disciples said to him, Lord, allow me first to go and bury my father.
But Jesus said to him, Follow me, and leave the dead to bury their own dead.
And upon his entering into the boat, his disciples followed him.
And behold, a great tempest developed in the sea, so as for the boat to be covered by the waves, but he was sleeping.
And the disciples having approached, they awoke him, saying, Save us, Lord, we are perishing.
And he says to them, Why are ye cowardly, O ye of little faith? Then after rising, he rebuked the winds and the sea, and there became a great calm.
But the men marveled, saying, What kind of man is this, that even the winds and the sea obey him?
And upon his coming to the other side, into the country of the Gergesenes, two men being demon possessed met him, coming out of the sepulchers, exceedingly fierce, so that no man could pass by that way.
And behold, they cried out, saying, What is with us and thee, Jesus, Son of God? Did thou come here before the time to torment us?
Now there was afar off from them a herd of many swine feeding.
And the demons besought him, saying, If thou cast us out, allow us to go away into the herd of swine.
And he said to them, Go. And having come out, they went into the herd of swine. And behold, the whole herd of the swine stampeded down the slope into the sea, and perished in the waters.
And those who tended them fled, and having gone into the city, they told everything, also the things of the men being demon possessed.
And behold, the whole city came out to a meeting with Jesus. And having seen him, they besought him that he would depart from their regions.

And after entering into the boat, he passed over, and came into his own city.
And behold, they brought to him a paralyzed man who was placed on a bed. And having seen their faith Jesus said to the paralyzed man, Cheer up, child, thy sins have been forgiven thee.
And behold, some of the scholars said within themselves, This man blasphemes.
And having known their thoughts Jesus said, Why think ye evil in your hearts?
For which is easier, to say, Thy sins have been forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and walk?
But that ye may know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins (then he says to the paralyzed man), After rising, take up thy bed, and go to thy house.
And after rising, he departed to his house.
But when the multitudes saw it, they marveled, and glorified God, who gave such authority to men.
And passing forth from there, Jesus saw a man named Matthew sitting at the tax office. And he says to him, Follow me. And after rising, he followed him.
And it came to pass while he relaxed in the house, and behold, many tax collectors and sinners having come, they were sitting with Jesus and his disciples.
And when the Pharisees saw it, they said to his disciples, Why does your teacher eat with the tax collectors and sinners?
But Jesus having heard it, he said to them, Those who are strong have no need of a physician, but those who fare badly.
But after going, learn what this means, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice, for I came not to call the righteous, but sinners for repentance.
Then the disciples of John come to him, saying, Why do we and the Pharisees fast much, but thy disciples fast not?
And Jesus said to them, The sons of the wedding hall cannot mourn as long as the bridegroom is with them. But the days will come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, and then they will fast.
And no man puts a patch of new cloth upon an old garment, for the patch of it pulls from the garment, and a tear becomes worse.
Neither do they put new wine into old wineskins. Otherwise the wineskins burst, and the wine is spilled, and the wineskins will perish. But they put new wine into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved.
While he spoke these things to them, behold, one ruler who came worshiped him, saying, My daughter has just now perished, but after coming, lay thy hand upon her, and she will live.
And having risen, Jesus followed him, also his disciples.
And behold, a woman having an issue of blood twelve years, after coming from behind, touched the edge of his garment.
For she said within herself, If only I may touch his garment, I will be healed.
But having turned around and seen her, Jesus said, Cheer up, daughter, thy faith has healed thee. And the woman was healed from that hour.
And Jesus having come into the ruler's house, and having seen the minstrels, and the crowd making a commotion,
he says to them, Depart, for the little girl did not die, but sleeps. And they ridiculed him.
But when the crowd was put out, having entered in, he took her hand, and the little girl arose.
And this report went forth into all that land.
And when Jesus departed from there, two blind men followed him, crying out, and saying, Be merciful to us, thou son of David.
And when he came into the house, the blind men came to him. And Jesus says to them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They say to him, Yes, Lord.
Then he touched their eyes, saying, According to your faith may it happen to you.
And their eyes were opened. And Jesus strictly warned them, saying, See that no man knows it.
But having departed, they widely proclaimed him in all that land.
And after they departed, behold, they brought to him a mute man possessed with a demon.
And when the demon was cast out, the mute man spoke. And the multitudes marveled, saying, It was never so seen in Israel.
But the Pharisees said, By the ruler of the demons he casts out demons.
And Jesus went about all the cities and the villages, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the good news of the kingdom, and healing every sickness and every disease among the people.
But when he saw the multitudes, he felt compassion for them, because they were troubled and dejected, as sheep having no shepherd.
Then he says to his disciples, The harvest truly is plentiful, but the workmen are few.
Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth workmen into his harvest.

And having called in his twelve disciples, he gave them authority over unclean spirits, so as to cast them out, and to heal every sickness and every disease.
First, Simon, who is called Peter, and Andrew his brother, James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother,
Philip, and Bartholomew, Thomas, and Matthew the tax collector, James the son of Alphaeus, and Lebbaeus who was surnamed Thaddaeus,
Simon the Canaanite, and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him.
These twelve Jesus sent forth, having ordered them, saying, Go not into a way of the Gentiles, and enter not into a city of the Samaritans,
but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
And while going, preach, saying, The kingdom of the heavens has come near.
Heal those who are feeble, cleanse the lepers, cast out demons. Freely ye received, freely give.
Acquire no gold, nor silver, nor copper in your belts,
no bag for the road, nor two coats, nor shoes, nor staffs, for the workman is worthy of his provision.
And into whatever city or village ye may enter, inquire who in it is worthy, and there abide until ye go forth.
And while entering into the house, salute it.
And if indeed the house is worthy, let your peace come upon it, but if it is not worthy, let your peace return to you.
And whoever will not receive you, nor hear your words, while departing that house or that city, shake off the dust of your feet.
Truly I say to you, it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.
Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves. Become ye therefore wise as serpents, and innocent as doves.
But beware of men, for they will deliver you up to councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues,
and ye will be brought to governors and even kings because of me, for a witness to them and to the Gentiles.
But when they deliver you up, be not anxious how or what ye should speak, for it will be given you in that hour what ye will speak.
For ye are not who speak, but the Spirit of your Father speaking in you.
And a brother will deliver up a brother to death, and a father a child. And children will rise up against parents, and condemn them to death.
And ye will be hated by all men because of my name, but he who endures to the end, this man will be saved.
But when they persecute you in this city, flee into the other, for truly I say to you, ye will, no, not have completed the cities of Israel, until the Son of man comes.
A pupil is not above his teacher, nor a bondman above his lord.
It is enough for the pupil that he becomes like his teacher, and the bondman like his lord. If they have called the house-ruler Beelzebub, how much more those of his household.
Fear them not therefore, for there is nothing covered, that will not be revealed, and hid, that will not be known.
What I tell you in the darkness, speak ye in the light, and what ye hear in the ear, proclaim upon the housetops.
And be not afraid of those who kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. But rather fear him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.
Are not two sparrows sold for a penny? And not one of them will fall on the ground independent of your Father.
But even the hairs of your head are all numbered.
Fear not therefore, ye are of worth more than many sparrows.
Therefore every man, whoever will profess in me before men, I also will profess in him before my Father in the heavens.
But whoever would deny me before men, I also will deny him before my Father in the heavens.
Think not that I came to spread peace on the earth. I came not to spread peace, but a sword.
For I came to divide a man against his father, and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
And a man's foes, are those of his own household.
He who loves father or mother above me is not worthy of me, and he who loves son or daughter above me is not worthy of me.
And he who does not take his cross and follow behind me, is not worthy of me.
He who finds his life will lose it, and he who loses his life because of me will find it.
He who receives you receives me, and he who receives me receives him who sent me.
He who receives a prophet in the name of a prophet will receive a prophet's reward, and he who receives a righteous man in the name of a righteous man will receive a righteous man's reward.
And whoever may give to drink one of these little ones merely a cold cup in the name of a disciple, truly I say to you he will, no, not lose his reward.

And it came to pass when Jesus finished directing his twelve disciples, he departed from there to teach and preach in their cities.
Now when John heard in the prison the works of the Christ, having sent two of his disciples,
he said to him, Are thou he who comes, or do we look for another man?
the blind receive their sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, and the dead are raised up, and the poor are proclaimed good news.
And blessed is he, whoever will not be caused to stumble by me.
And while those men departed, Jesus began to say to the multitudes about John, What did ye go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?
But what did ye go out to see? A man clothed in delicate clothes? Behold, those wearing delicate things are in king's houses.
But what did ye go out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say to you, and more than a prophet.
For this is he about whom it is written, Behold, I send my agent before thy face who will prepare thy way before thee.
Truly I say to you, among men born of women there has not been raised a greater than John the immerser. Yet the smaller in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he.
And from the days of John the immerser until now the kingdom of the heavens is treated aggressively, and aggressors seize it.
For all the prophets and the law prophesied until John.
And if ye are willing to receive it, he is Elijah who is going to come.
He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
But to what shall I compare this generation? It is like children sitting in the marketplaces, calling to their companions,
and saying, We piped to you, and ye did not dance, we mourned to you, and ye did not beat the breast.
For John came neither eating nor drinking, and they say, He has a demon.
The Son of man came eating and drinking, and they say, Behold the man, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners! And wisdom is justified from her children.
Then he began to upbraid the cities in which most of his mighty works occurred, because they did not repent.
Woe to thee, Chorazin! Woe to thee, Bethsaida! Because if the mighty works that occurred in you occurred in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in sackcloth and ashes.
Nevertheless I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the day of judgment than for you.
And thou, Capernaum, which was exalted as far as the sky. Thou will be brought down as far as Hades, because if the mighty works had occurred in Sodom that occurred in thee, it would have remained until this day.
Nevertheless I say to you that it will be more tolerable for the land of Sodom in the day of judgment, than for thee.
Jesus having responded at that time, said, I extol thee, O Father, Lord of the heaven and the earth, because thou hid these things from the wise and intelligent, and revealed them to the childlike.
Yea, Father, because this way it was done pleasing in thy sight.
All things were delivered to me by my Father. And no man knows the Son, except the Father, nor does any man know the Father, except the Son, and he to whomever the Son wants to reveal him.
Come to me, all ye who labor and have been burdened, and I will give you rest.
Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me, because I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye will find rest for your souls.
For my yoke is befitting, and my burden is light.

At that time Jesus went through the grain fields on the sabbath, and his disciples were hungry and began to pluck ears, and to eat.
But the Pharisees, when they saw it, said to him, Behold, thy disciples do what is not permitted to do upon the sabbath.
But he said to them, Have ye not read what David did when he was hungry, he and those with him,
how he entered into the house of God, and ate the loaves of the presentation, which was not permitted for him to eat, nor for those with him, except only for the priests?
Or have ye not read in the law, that on the sabbath the priests in the temple profane the sabbath, and are guiltless?
But I say to you, that a greater than the temple is here.
But if ye had known what this means, I desire mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the innocent.
For the Son of man is Lord of the sabbath.
And having departed from there, he went into their synagogue.
And behold, there was a man having a withered hand. And they interrogated him, asking if it is permitted to heal on the sabbath, so that they might accuse him.
And he said to them, What man of you will there be, who will have one sheep, and if this falls into a pit on the sabbath, will he not grasp it, and lift it out?
How much therefore a man is superior to a sheep. So then it is permitted to do good on the sabbath.
Then he says to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it forth, and it was restored whole, as the other.
But when they went out, the Pharisees held a consultation against him, how they might destroy him.
And having known it Jesus withdrew from there, and many multitudes followed him, and he healed them all.
And he chided them so that they would not make him known,
so that what was spoken through Isaiah the prophet might be fulfilled, which says,
Behold, my Boy whom I chose, my beloved in whom my soul is well pleased. I will put my Spirit upon him, and he will declare justice to the Gentiles.
He will not quarrel, nor will he shout, nor will any man hear his voice in the thoroughfares.
A bruised reed he will not break, and smoldering flax he will not quench, until he sends forth justice for victory.
And in his name Gentiles will hope.
Then a blind and mute man being demon possessed, was brought to him. And he healed him, so as for the blind and mute man both to speak and to see.
And all the multitudes were amazed, and said, Is this not the son of David?
But when the Pharisees heard it, they said, This man does not cast out demons, except by Beelzebub the ruler of the demons.
And having known their thoughts Jesus said to them, Every kingdom divided against itself is brought to ruin, and every city or house divided against itself will not stand.
And if Satan casts out Satan, he is divided against himself. How then will his kingdom stand?
And if I cast out demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons cast them out? Because of this they will be your judges.
But if I cast out demons by the Spirit of God, then the kingdom of God has come near you.
Or how can any man enter into the house of the strong man, and plunder his goods, unless he first binds the strong man? And then he will plunder his house.
He who is not with me is against me, and he who does not gather with me scatters.
Because of this I say to you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven to men, but the blasphemy of the Spirit will not be forgiven men.
And whoever speaks a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him, but whoever speaks against the Holy Spirit, it will not be forgiven him, neither in the present age, nor in the one that is coming.
Either make the tree good, and its fruit good, or make the tree corrupt, and its fruit corrupt, for the tree is known by its fruit.
Ye offspring of vipers, how can ye, being evil, speak good things? For out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
The good man out of his good treasure brings forth good things, and the evil man out of his evil treasure brings forth evil things.
But I say to you, that every idle word, whatever men may speak, they will render account about it in the day of judgment.
For from thy words thou will be justified, and from thy words thou will be condemned.
Then some of the scholars and Pharisees answered, saying, Teacher, we want to see a sign from thee.
But having answered, he said to them, An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah the prophet.
For as Jonah was in the belly of the sea-creature three days and three nights, so the Son of man will be in the heart of the earth three days and three nights.
The men of Nineveh will rise up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, a greater than Jonah is here.
The queen of the south will rise up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, a greater than Solomon is here.
But when the unclean spirit goes forth out of the man, it passes through waterless places, seeking rest, and finds it not.
Then it says, I will return into my house from where I came out. And when it comes, it finds it empty, swept, and put in order.
Then it goes, and takes with itself seven other spirits more evil than itself, and having enter in, they dwell there. And the last state of that man becomes worse than the first. So it will also be to this evil generation.
While he was still speaking to the multitudes, behold, his mother and his brothers had stood outside, seeking to speak to him.
And some man said to him, Behold, thy mother and thy brothers stand outside, seeking to speak to thee.
But having answered, he said to the man who told him, Who is my mother, and who are my brothers?
And having stretched forth his hand towards his disciples, he said, Behold, my mother and my brothers.
For whoever does the will of my Father in the heavens, he is my brother, and sister, and mother.

And on that day, having departed from the house, Jesus was sitting beside the sea.
And many multitudes were gathered to him, so as for him (having entered in) to sit in the boat, and all the multitude had stood on the shore.
And he spoke many things to them in parables, saying, Behold, the man who sows went forth to sow.
And as he sowed, some fell by the wayside, and the birds came and devoured them.
But others fell upon the rocky places, where they had not much soil, and straightaway they sprang up because they had no depth of soil.
But when the sun was risen, they were scorched, and because they had no root they withered.
And others fell in the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked them.
But others fell upon the good ground, and yielded fruit, some a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.
He who has ears, let him hear.
And the disciples having come, they said to him, Why do thou speak to them in parables?
And having answered, he said to them, Because it has been given to you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of the heavens, but to those men it has not been given.
For whoever has, to him will be given, and he will have abundance, but whoever has not, even what he has will be taken away from him.
Because of this I speak to them in parables, because seeing they see not, and hearing they hear not, nor do they understand.
And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah, which says, By hearing ye will hear, and will, no, not understand, and seeing ye will see, and will, no, not perceive.
For this people's heart became fat, and their ears hear heavily, and their eyes are shut, lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their heart, and should turn, and I will heal them.
But blessed are your eyes, because they see, and your ears, because they hear.
For truly I say to you, that many prophets and righteous men longed to see the things that ye see, and did not see them, and to hear the things that ye hear, and did not hear them.
Hear ye then the parable of the man who sows.
Of every man who hears the word of the kingdom, and does not understand it, evil comes, and snatches away what was sown in his heart. This is that which was sown by the wayside.
And that which was sown upon the rocky places, this is he who hears the word, and straightaway receiving it with joy,
yet he has no root in himself, instead it is temporary. And when tribulation or persecution develops because of the word, straightaway he is caused to stumble.
And that which was sown in the thorns, this is he who hears the word, and the care of this age, and the deceitfulness of wealth, choke the word, and he becomes unfruitful.
But that which was sown upon the good ground, this is he who hears the word, and understands it, who indeed bears fruit, and is productive, some a hundredfold, some sixty, some thirty.
He set forth another parable to them, saying, The kingdom of the heavens is compared to a man sowing good seed in his field.
But while the men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares in the midst of the wheat, and went away.
And when the blade sprouted and produced fruit, then the tares also appeared.
But the bondmen of the house-ruler having come, they said to him, Sir, did thou not sow good seed in thy field? From where then does it have tares?
And he said to them, A hostile man did this. And the bondmen said to him, Do thou desire therefore, after going, we would gather them up?
But he said, No, lest while gathering up the tares, ye uproot the wheat together with them.
Allow both to grow together until the harvest. And at the time of the harvest I will say to the reapers, Gather up first the tares, and bind them in bundles in order to burn them, but gather the wheat into my barn.
He set forth another parable to them, saying, The kingdom of the heavens is like a grain of mustard plant, which having taken, a man sowed in his field.
Which indeed is smaller than all seeds, but when it is grown, it is greater than the plants, and becomes a tree, so as for the birds of the sky to come and lodge in the branches of it.
He spoke another parable to them. The kingdom of the heavens is like leaven, which having taken, a woman hid in three measures of meal until it was all leavened.
Jesus spoke all these things in parables to the multitudes, and he did not speak to them independent of a parable,
so that what was spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled, which says, I will open my mouth in parables. I will utter things concealed from the foundation of the world.
Then having sent the multitudes away, Jesus came into the house. And his disciples came to him, saying, Explain to us the parable of the tares of the field.
And having answered, he said to them, He who sows the good seed is the Son of man,
and the field is the world, and the good seed, these are the sons of the kingdom, but the tares are the sons of evil.
And the enemy who sowed them is the devil, and the harvest is the end of the age, and the reapers are agents.
As therefore the tares are gathered up and burned in fire, so it will be at the end of this age.
The Son of man will send forth his agents, and they will gather out of his kingdom all the stumbling-blocks, and those doing lawlessness,
and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
Then the righteous will shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
Again the kingdom of the heavens is like a treasure hidden in the field, which a man having found, he hid. And from the joy of it, he goes and sells all, as many things as he has, and buys that field.
Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a merchant, seeking fine pearls.
Who, having found one very valuable pearl, after departing, sold all, as many things as he had, and bought it.
Again, the kingdom of the heavens is like a net that was cast into the sea, and gathered from every kind,
which, when it was full, after dragging to the shore, having sat down, they gathered the good into vessels, but they cast out the useless.
So it will be at the end of the age. The agents will come forth, and separate the bad from among the righteous,
and will cast them into the furnace of fire. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
Jesus says to them, Have ye understood all these things? They say to him, Yes, Lord.
And he said to them, Because of this every scholar who has been instructed in the kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a house-ruler, who brings forth out of his treasure things new and old.
And it came to pass, when Jesus finished these parables, he departed from there.
And having come into his fatherland he taught them in their synagogue, so as for them to be astonished, and say, From where is this wisdom and powers in this man?
Is not this the carpenter's son? Is not his mother called Mary, and his brothers, James and Joses and Simon and Judas?
And his sisters, are they not all near us? From where then are all these things in this man?
And they were offended by him. But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor, except in his fatherland, and in his house.
And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.

At that time Herod the tetrarch heard the report of Jesus,
and he said to his boys, This is John the immerser. He has risen from the dead, and because of this the powers work in him.
For Herod having arrested John, bound him and put him in prison because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife.
For John said to him, It is not permitted for thee to have her.
And though he wanted to kill him, he feared the multitude because they held him as a prophet.
But Herod's birthday being brought, the daughter of Herodias danced in the midst, and pleased Herod.
Whereupon he promised with an oath to give her whatever she would ask.
And she, having been put forward by her mother, says, Give me here on a platter the head of John the immerser.
And he became sad, but because of the oaths, and of those dining together, the king commanded it to be given.
And having sent, he beheaded John in the prison.
And his head was brought on a platter, and given to the maiden, and she brought it to her mother.
And after coming, his disciples took up the body and buried it, and having gone, they informed Jesus.
Now when Jesus heard it, he departed from there in a boat into a desolate place in private. And when the multitudes heard of it, they followed him on foot from the cities.
And having come forth, Jesus saw a great multitude, and he felt compassion toward them, and healed the feeble of them.
And having become evening, his disciples came to him, saying, The place is desolate, and the hour is now past. Send the multitudes away, so that having gone into the villages, they may buy food for themselves.
But Jesus said to them, They have no need to depart. Give ye them to eat.
And they say to him, We have not here, except five loaves and two fishes.
But he said, Bring them here to me.
And after commanding the multitudes to sit down on the grass, having taken the five loaves, and the two fishes, having looking up to heaven, he blessed. And having broken them in pieces, he gave the loaves to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes.
And they all ate, and were filled. And they took up that which remained of the fragments, twelve baskets full.
And those who ate were about five thousand men, besides women and children.
And straightaway Jesus compelled the disciples to enter into the boat, and to go ahead of him to the other side, until he would dismiss the multitudes.
And having dismissed the multitudes, he went up onto the mountain in private to pray. And having become evening, he was there alone.
But the boat was now in the midst of the sea, being buffeted by the waves, for the wind was contrary.
And in the fourth watch of the night Jesus went to them, walking upon the sea.
And when the disciples saw him walking on the sea, they were troubled, saying, It is a ghost, and they cried out from fear.
But straightaway Jesus spoke to them, saying, Cheer up. It is I, fear not.
And having answered him, Peter said, Lord, if it be thou, bid me come to thee on the waters.
And he said, Come. And having come down from the boat, Peter walked upon the water to go to Jesus.
But seeing the boisterous wind, he was afraid, and having begun to sink, he cried out, saying, Lord, save me.
And straightaway having stretched forth his hand, Jesus took hold of him, and says to him, O thou of little faith, why did thou doubt?
And when they entered into the boat, the wind ceased.
And those who came in the boat worshiped him, saying, Thou really are the Son of God.
And when they crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret.
And when they recognized him, the men of that place sent into that whole region round about, and brought to him all those faring badly.
And they besought him that they might only touch the hem of his garment. And as many as touched were healed.

Then scholars and Pharisees from Jerusalem come to Jesus, saying,
Why do thy disciples transgress the tradition of the elders? For they do not wash their hands when they eat bread.
And having answered, he said to them, Why do ye also transgress the commandment of God, because of your tradition?
For God commanded, saying, Honor thy father and thy mother, and, He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him perish in death.
But ye say, Whoever may say to the father or the mother, Whatever thou might have benefited from me is an offering.
And he will, no, not honor his father or mother. And ye have annulled the command of God because of your tradition.
Ye hypocrites, well did Isaiah prophesy about you, saying,
This people comes near me with their mouth, and honors me with their lips, but their heart is far distant from me.
And in vain they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.
And having called in the multitude, he said to them, Hear and understand.
Not that which enters into the mouth defiles the man, but that which comes out of the mouth, this defiles the man.
Then having come near, his disciples said to him, Know thou that the Pharisees were offended when they heard the saying?
But having answered, he said, Every plant that my heavenly Father did not plant, will be uprooted.
Leave them. They are blind leaders of blind men, and if a blind man leads a blind man, both will fall into a ditch.
And having answered, Peter said to him, Explain this parable to us.
And Jesus said, Are ye also still without understanding?
Do ye not yet understand, that everything entering into the mouth goes into the belly, and is cast out into a toilet?
But the things coming out of the mouth come forth from the heart, and those things defile the man.
For from the heart comes forth evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witnessings, revilings.
These are things defiling the man. But to eat with unwashed hands does not defile the man.
And having gone out from there, Jesus departed into the regions of Tyre and Sidon.
And behold, a Canaanite woman having come out from those regions, cried out to him, saying, Be merciful to me, O Lord, thou son of David, my daughter is grievously demon-possessed.
But he answered her not a word. And his disciples having approached, they besought him, saying, Send her away, because she cries out behind us.
But having answered, he said, I was not sent except to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
But having come, she worshiped him, saying, Lord, help me.
And having answered, he said, It is not right to take the children's bread and cast it to the house dogs.
But she said, Yes, Lord, for even the house dogs eat of the crumbs that fall from the table of their masters.
Then Jesus having answered, said to her, O woman, great is thy faith. Be it done for thee as thou desire. And her daughter was healed from that hour.
And having departed from there, Jesus came near the sea of Galilee. And having gone up onto the mountain, he sat there.
And many multitudes came to him, having with them the lame, blind, mute, crippled, and many others. And they placed them beside Jesus' feet, and he healed them,
so as for the multitudes to marvel seeing the mute speaking, the maimed healthy, and the lame walking, and the blind seeing. And they glorified the God of Israel.
And Jesus having summoned his disciples, he said, I feel compassion toward the multitude because they continue with me now three days and do not have what they might eat. And I do not want to dismiss them without food, lest they might faint on the way.
And his disciples say to him, From where are so many loaves for us in a wilderness so as to feed so great a multitude?
And Jesus says to them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven, and a few small fishes.
And he commanded the multitudes to sit down on the ground.
And after taking the seven loaves and the fishes, having expressed thanks, he broke in pieces, and gave to the disciples, and the disciples to the multitudes.
And they all ate and were filled. And they took up seven hampers full of the fragments that remained.
And those who ate were four thousand men, besides women and children.
And having dismissed the multitudes, he entered into the boat, and came into the regions of Magdala.

And the Pharisees and Sadducees who came, testing, demanded him to exhibit to them a sign from the sky.
But having answered, he said to them, When it becomes evening, ye say, Fair weather, for the sky is red.
And at morning, Bad weather today, for the sky is red, being gloomy. Hypocrites! Ye indeed know how to discern the face of the sky, but the signs of the times ye are not able.
An evil and adulterous generation seeks after a sign, and no sign will be given to it, except the sign of Jonah the prophet. And having left them behind, he departed.
And his disciples having come to the other side, they forgot to take loaves.
And Jesus said to them, Watch and beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
And they deliberated among themselves, saying, We took no loaves.
And having known it, Jesus said to them, O ye of little faith, why do ye deliberate among yourselves because ye brought no loaves?
Do ye not yet understand, nor remember the five loaves of the five thousand, and how many baskets ye took up,
nor the seven loaves of the four thousand, and how many hampers ye took up?
How do ye not understand that I spoke to you not about bread, to beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees?
Then they understood that he said not to beware of the leaven of bread, but of the teaching of the Pharisees and Sadducees.
Now when Jesus came into the regions of Caesarea Philippi, he asked his disciples, saying, Who do men say I, the Son of man, am?
And they said, Some, John the immerser, others, Elijah, but others, Jeremiah, or one of the prophets.
He says to them, But who say ye, I am?
And Simon Peter having answered, said, Thou are the Christ, the Son of the living God.
And having answered, Jesus said to him, Blessed are thou, Simon Bar-jonah, because flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father in the heavens.
And I also say to thee, that thou are Peter, and upon this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades will not prevail against it.
And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens, and whatever thou may bind on earth will be what is bound in the heavens, and whatever thou may loose on the earth will be what is loosed in the heavens.
Then he commanded his disciples that they should tell no man that he is Jesus, the Christ.
From that time Jesus began to show his disciples that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders, and chief priests, and scholars, and be killed, and the third day be raised up.
And having taken him aside, Peter began to rebuke him, saying, Be merciful to thee, Lord. This will, no, not be to thee.
But having turned around, he said to Peter, Go thee behind me, Satan. Thou are my stumbling-block, because thou regard not the things of God, but the things of men.
Then Jesus said to his disciples, If any man wants to come behind me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever wants save his life will lose it, and whoever will lose his life for my sake will find it.
For what does it profit a man, if he should gain the whole world, and lose his soul? Or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?
For the Son of man is going to come in the glory of his Father with his agents, and then he will reward each man according to his actions.
Truly I say to you, there are some of those who stand here, who will, no, not taste of death, until they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom.

And after six days Jesus takes Peter, and James, and John his brother, and brings them up onto a high mountain in private.
And he was transfigured before them, and his face shone as the sun, and his garments became white as the light.
And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them, talking with him.
And having responded, Peter said to Jesus, Lord, it is good for us to be here. If thou desire, we could make here three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
While he was still speaking, behold, a bright cloud overshadowed them. And lo, a voice out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. Hear ye him.
And when the disciples heard it, they fell on their face, and were exceedingly afraid.
And having come, Jesus touched them and said, Arise, and fear not.
And having lifted up their eyes, they saw no man, except Jesus only.
And while they were coming down from the mountain, Jesus commanded them, saying, Tell the vision to no man, until the Son of man will rise from the dead.
And his disciples questioned him, saying, Why then do the scholars say that Elijah must first come?
And having answered, Jesus said to them, Elijah indeed comes first, and will restore all.
But I say to you, that Elijah already came, and they knew him not, but did to him how many things they wanted. Likewise also the Son of man is going to suffer by them.
Then the disciples understood that he spoke to them about John the immerser.
And when they came to the multitude, a man came to him, kneeling to him, and saying,
Lord, be merciful to my son, because he is lunatic, and suffers badly. For he often falls into the fire, and often into the water.
And I brought him to thy disciples, and they could not heal him.
And having answered, Jesus said, O faithless and perverted generation, how long will I be with you? How long will I endure you? Bring him here to me.
And Jesus rebuked it, and the demon departed from him. And the boy was cured from that hour.
Then the disciples having come to Jesus in private, said, Why could we not cast it out?
And Jesus said to them, Because of your unbelief. For truly I say to you, if ye have faith as a grain of a mustard plant, ye will say to this mountain, Remove from here to there, and it will depart, and nothing will be impossible to you.
But this kind does not go out except by prayer and fasting.
And while they turned back in Galilee, Jesus said to them, The Son of man is going to be delivered into the hands of men,
and they will kill him, and the third day he will be raised up. And they were exceedingly sorry.
And when they came to Capernaum, those who receive the double-drachma came to Peter, and said, Does not your teacher pay the double-drachma?
He says, Yes. And when he entered into the house, Jesus anticipated him, saying, What think thou, Simon? The kings of the earth, from whom do they take taxes or tribute, from their sons or from strangers?
And Peter says to him, From strangers. Jesus said to him, Therefore the sons are free.
But, so that we might not offend them, after going to the sea, cast a hook. And take up the first fish coming up, and having opened its mouth, thou will find a four-drachma coin. After taking that, give thou to them for me and thee.

In that hour the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Who then is greater in the kingdom of the heavens?
And having called in a child, Jesus set it in the midst of them.
And he said, Truly I say to you, if ye are not turned, and become as children, ye will, no, not enter into the kingdom of the heavens.
He therefore who will make himself lowly as this child, this man is the greater in the kingdom of the heavens.
And whoever will receive one such child in my name receives me.
But whoever may cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it is advantageous for him that a donkey-powered millstone were hanged on his neck, and he were drowned in the depth of the sea.
Woe to the world because of stumbling-blocks. For it is necessary that the stumbling-blocks come, yet woe to that man through whom the stumbling-block comes.
And if thy hand or thy foot causes thee to stumble, cut them off and cast from thee. It is good for thee to enter into life crippled or maimed, than having two hands or two feet to be cast into the eternal fire.
And if thine eye causes thee to stumble, remove it and cast it from thee. It is good for thee to enter into life one-eyed, than having two eyes to be cast into the hell of fire.
See that ye not disparage one of these little ones, for I say to you, that in the heavens their agents do always behold the face of my Father in the heavens.
For the Son of man came to save that which was lost.
What does it seem to you? If it happens a hundred sheep are with some man, and one of them went astray, after going (having left the ninety-nine on the mountains), does he not seek the one going astray?
And if he happens to find it, truly I say to you, that he rejoices over it more than over the ninety-nine that have not gone astray.
So, it is not a purpose before your Father in the heavens, that one of these little ones should perish.
But if thy brother should sin against thee, go and reprove him between thee and him alone. If he should hear thee, thou have gained thy brother.
But if he should not hear, take with thee one or two besides, so that at the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established.
And if he is heedless of them, speak to the church. But if he is also heedless of the church, let him be to thee as the heathen and the tax collector.
Truly I say to you, however many things ye may bind on the earth will be things that are bound in heaven, and however many things ye may loose on the earth will be things that that are loosed in heaven.
Again I say to you truly, that if two of you should agree on the earth concerning every matter, whatever they might ask, it will happen for them from my Father in the heavens.
For where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them.
Then Peter having come to him, he said, Lord, how often will my brother sin against me, and I forgive him? Until seven times?
Jesus says to him, I say to thee, not until seven times, but until seventy times seven.
Because of this the kingdom of the heavens is compared to a man, a king, who wanted to settle account with his bondmen.
And when he began to settle, one debtor of ten thousand talents was brought to him.
But of him not having to pay, his lord commanded him to be sold, and his wife and children, and all things, as many as he had, and payment to be made.
The bondman therefore having fallen down, worshiped him, saying, Lord, be patient toward me and I will pay thee all.
And having felt compassion, the lord of that bondman released him, and forgave him the debt.
But after going out, that bondman found one of his fellow bondmen who owed him a hundred denarii. And having grabbed him, he choked him, saying, Pay me if thou owe anything.
So his fellow bondman having fallen down at his feet, besought him, saying, Be patience toward me, and I will pay thee.
But he would not, instead, having left him, he cast him into prison until he would pay that which was owed.
And when his fellow bondmen saw the things that happened, they were extremely sorry. And after coming, they reported to their lord all the things that happened.
Then his lord having summoned him, he says to him, Thou evil bondman, I forgave thee all that debt because thou besought me.
Was it not necessary for thee also to be merciful to thy fellow bondman, as I also was merciful to thee?
And having become angry, his lord delivered him to the tormentors until he would pay all that was due to him.
So also my heavenly Father will do to you, if ye do not forgive each man his brother, from your hearts, their trespasses.

And it came to pass when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed from Galilee and came into the regions of Judea beyond the Jordan.
And many multitudes followed him and he healed them there.
And Pharisees came to him, trying him, and saying to him, Is it permitted for a man to divorce his wife for every cause?
And having answered, he said to them, Have ye not read that he who made them from the beginning made them male and female,
and said, For this reason a man will leave his father and mother behind, and will be bonded with his wife, and the two will be in one flesh?
So that they are no longer two, but one flesh. What therefore God has joined together, no man shall separate.
They say to him, Why then did Moses command to give a writing of divorcement, and to divorce her?
He says to them, For your hard heart Moses allowed you to divorce your wives, but from the beginning it did not happen this way.
And I say to you, that whoever may divorce his wife, not for fornication, and will marry another, commits adultery. And he who married her who has been divorced commits adultery.
His disciples say to him, If the case of the man with his wife is this way, it is not advantageous to marry.
But he said to them, Not all men can accommodate this saying, but to whom it has been given.
For there are eunuchs who were born this way from their mother's belly, and there are eunuchs who were made eunuchs by men, and there are eunuchs who made themselves eunuchs because of the kingdom of the heavens. He who is able to receive it, let him receive it.
Then children were brought to him, so that he would lay his hands on them and pray, but the disciples rebuked them.
But Jesus said, Allow the children, and do not forbid them to come to me, for of such kind is the kingdom of the heavens.
And having laid his hands on them, he departed from there.
And behold one man having come to him, said, Good teacher, what good thing should I do so that I may have eternal life?
And he said to him, Why do thou call me good? There is none good except one, God. But if thou want to enter into life, keep the commandments.
He says to him, Which? And Jesus said, Thou shall not murder. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not testify falsely.
Honor the father and mother, and, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
The young man says to him, All these things I have kept from my youthfulness. What do I lack yet?
Jesus said to him, If thou want to be perfect, go, sell the things being possessed by thee, and give to the poor, and thou will have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.
But when the young man heard the saying, he went away sorrowing, for he was having many possessions.
And Jesus said to his disciples, Truly I say to you, that a rich man will enter into the kingdom of the heavens difficultly.
And again I say to you, it is easier for a camel to pass through the hole of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
And when his disciples heard it, they were exceedingly amazed, saying, Who then can be saved?
And having looked, Jesus said to them, With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible.
Then having answered, Peter said to him, Lo, we have forsaken all, and followed thee. What then will be for us?
And Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, that ye who have followed me, in the regeneration when the Son of man will sit on the throne of his glory, ye also will sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
And every man who has forsaken houses, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, because of my name, will receive a hundredfold, and will inherit eternal life.
But many first will be last, and last, first.

For the kingdom of the heavens is compared to a man, a house-ruler, who went out in the early morning at the same time to hire workmen for his vineyard.
And having agreed with the workmen for a denarius a day, he sent them into his vineyard.
And having gone out about the third hour, he saw others having stood idle in the marketplace.
And he said to those men, Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatever would be right I will give you, and they went.
Again having gone out about the sixth and the ninth hour, he did likewise.
And having gone out about the eleventh hour, he found others who have stood idle. And he says to them, Why have ye stood here idle the whole day?
They say to him, Because no man has hired us. He says to them, Go ye also into the vineyard, and whatever would be right ye will receive.
And having become evening, the lord of the vineyard says to his manager, Call the workmen, and render to them their wage, having begun from the last until the first.
And those who came about the eleventh hour, each received a denarius.
But when the first came, they supposed that they would receive more. And they also received a denarius each.
And when they received it, they murmured against the house-ruler,
saying, These last did one hour, and thou have made them equal to us, who have borne the burden of the day and the heat.
But having answered, he said to one of them, Friend, I do thee no wrong. Did thou not agree with me for a denarius?
Take thine and go. But I want to give to this last man, as to thee also.
Is it not permitted for me to do what I want with my own? Is thine eye evil, because I am good?
So the last will be first, and the first last, for many are called, but few chosen.
And while going up to Jerusalem, Jesus took the twelve disciples in private on the way, and he said to them,
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of man will be betrayed to the chief priests and scholars. And they will condemn him to death,
and will deliver him to the Gentiles to ridicule, and to scourge, and to crucify. And the third day he will rise.
Then the mother of the sons of Zebedee came to him with her sons, worshiping, and asking something from him.
And he said to her, What do thou want? She says to him, Speak that these my two sons may sit, one at thy right hand and one at thy left hand in thy kingdom.
But having answered, Jesus said, Ye know not what ye are asking. Are ye able to drink the cup that I am going to drink, or to be immersed the immersion that I am immersed? They say to him, We are able.
And he says to them, Ye will indeed drink my cup, and ye will be immersed the immersion that I am immersed. But to sit at my right hand and at my left hand is not mine to give, but to whom it has been prepared by my Father.
And when the ten heard it, they were indignant about the two brothers.
But having summoned them, Jesus said, Ye know that the rulers of the Gentiles lord over them, and their eminent men have power over them.
But it shall not be so among you. Rather whoever wants to become great among you, he shall be your helper,
and whoever wants be first among you shall be your bondman.
Just as the Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many.
And when they went out from Jericho, a great multitude followed him.
And behold, two blind men sitting by the wayside, having heard that Jesus was passing by, cried out, saying, Be merciful to us, Lord, thou son of David.
And the multitude rebuked them, so that they would be quiet, but they cried out greater, saying, Be merciful to us, Lord, thou son of David.
And having stood still, Jesus called them and said, What do ye want that I would do to you?
They say to him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened.
And having felt compassion, Jesus touched their eyes, and straightaway they received their sight, and followed him.

And when they came near to Jerusalem, and came to Bethsphage, to the mount of Olives, then Jesus sent two disciples,
saying to them, Go into the village opposite you, and straightaway ye will find a donkey tied, and a colt with it. Having loosed them, bring to me.
And if any man says anything to you, ye will say, The Lord has need of them, and straightaway he will send them.
Now all this came to pass, so that what was spoken through the prophet might be fulfilled, which says,
Say ye to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy King comes to thee, meek, and mounted upon a donkey, and a colt the foal of a pack animal.
And the disciples having gone, and having done as Jesus commanded them,
they brought the donkey and the colt, and put their garments over them. And he sat upon them.
And the great multitude spread their garments on the road, and others cut down branches from the trees, and spread them on the road.
And the multitudes who went ahead and those who followed, cried out, saying, Hosanna to the son of David! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord. Hosanna in the highest!
And when he entered into Jerusalem, all the city was shaken, saying, Who is this?
And the multitudes said, This is Jesus, the prophet from Nazareth of Galilee.
And Jesus entered into the temple of God, and cast out all those who sold and bought in the temple. And he overturned the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of those who sold the doves.
And he says to them, It is written, My house will be called a house of prayer, but ye made it a den of robbers.
And the lame and the blind came to him in the temple, and he healed them.
But when the chief priests and the scholars saw the wonderful things that he did, and the boys crying out in the temple and saying, Hosanna to the son of David, they were indignant,
and said to him, Do thou hear what these are saying? And Jesus says to them, Yes! Did ye never read, Out of the mouth of children and those who suckle thou have perfected praise?
And having left them behind, he went out of the city to Bethany, and lodged there.
Now early while returning to the city, he was hungry.
And having seen a fig tree, one on the way, he came to it, and found nothing on it, except leaves only. And he says to it, Let fruit no longer be produced from thee into the age. And immediately the fig tree dried out.
And when the disciples saw it, they marveled, saying, How did the fig tree dry out immediately?
And having answered, Jesus said to them, Truly I say to you, if ye have faith, and doubt not, ye will not only do that of the fig tree, but even if ye may say to this mountain, Be thou taken up and cast into the sea, it will happen.
And all things, as many as ye may ask in prayer, believing, ye will receive.
And when he came into the temple, the chief priests and the elders of the people came to him while he taught, saying, By what authority do thou these things? And who gave thee this authority?
And having answered, Jesus said to them, I also will ask you one word, which if ye tell me, I also will tell you by what authority I do these things.
The immersion of John, from where was it, from heaven or from men? And they deliberated with themselves, saying, If we should say, From heaven, he will say to us, Why then did ye not believe him?
But if we should say, From men, we fear the multitude, for all hold John as a prophet.
And having answered Jesus, they said, We know not. He said to them, And neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
But what does it seem to you? A man had two children. And having come to the first, he said, Child, go work today in my vineyard.
And having answered, he said, I do not want to, but having repented later, he went.
And having come to the second, he said likewise. And having answered, he said, I, sir, and did not go.
Which of the two did the will of the father? They say to him, The first. Jesus says to them, Truly I say to you, that the tax collectors and the harlots go into the kingdom of God before you.
For John came to you in a way of righteousness, and ye did not believe him, but the tax collectors and the harlots believed him. And having seen it, ye did not repent afterward to believe him.
Hear ye another parable. There was a certain man who was a house-ruler, who planted a vineyard, and placed a hedge around it, and dug a winepress in it, and built a tower, and leased it to farmers, and went on a journey.
And when the time of the fruits approached, he sent his bondmen to the farmers to receive his fruits.
And the farmers having taken his bondmen, they beat one, and killed another, and stoned another.
Again, he sent other bondmen more than the first, and they did to them in like manner.
But finally he sent to them his son, saying, They will be made ashamed by my son.
But the farmers, when they saw the son, said among themselves, This is the heir, come, let us kill him, and possess his inheritance.
And having seized him, they cast him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
When therefore the lord of the vineyard comes, what will he do to those farmers?
They say to him, Evil men, he will miserably destroy them, and will lease out the vineyard to other farmers, who will render him the fruits in their seasons.
Jesus says to them, Did ye never read in the scriptures, The stone that those who build rejected, this came to be in the head of the corner. This happened from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes?
Because of this I say to you, that the kingdom of God will be taken away from you, and will be given to a nation producing the fruits of it.
And he who falls on this stone will be shattered, but on whomever it may fall, it will grind him to dust.
And when the chief priests and the Pharisees heard his parables, they knew that he spoke about them.
And when they sought to seize him, they feared the multitudes, because they held him as a prophet.

And having responded, Jesus again spoke to them in parables, saying,
The kingdom of the heavens is like a man, a king who made a wedding for his son.
And he sent forth his bondmen to call those who were invited to the wedding festivities, and they did not want to come.
Again he sent forth other bondmen, saying, Speak to those who were invited, Behold, I have prepared my dinner. My oxen and my fatlings have been killed, and all things are ready. Come to the wedding festivities.
But having disregarded, they departed, one to his own farm, another to his merchandise,
and the others having seized his bondmen, abused and killed them.
But having heard that, the king was angry, and having sent forth his armies, he destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.
Then he says to his bondmen, The wedding is indeed ready, but those who were invited were not worthy.
Go ye therefore to the crossings of the ways, and as many as ye may find, call to the wedding festivities.
And those bondmen having departed into the roads, they gathered together all, as many as they found, both bad and good. And the wedding was filled with those who were dining.
But when the king came in to see those who were dining, he saw there a man who was not clothed with a wedding garment.
And he says to him, Friend, how did thou come in here not having a wedding garment? But he was speechless.
Then the king said to the helpers, After binding him hands and feet, take him away and cast him out into the outer darkness. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
For many are called, but few chosen.
Then the Pharisees having departed, they took counsel how they might trap him in his talk.
And they send out their disciples to him, with the Herodians, saying, Teacher, we know that thou are true, and teach the way of God in truth, and it is not a concern to thee about a man, for thou look not to the personage of men.
Tell us therefore, what does it seem to thee? Is it permitted to give tribute to Caesar or not?
But Jesus having known their wickedness, said, Why do ye tempt me, ye hypocrites?
Exhibit to me the tribute money. And they brought to him a denarius.
And he says to them, Whose is this image and inscription?
They say to him, Caesar's. Then he says to them, Therefore, render the things of Caesar to Caesar, and the things of God to God.
And when they heard it, they marveled. And having left him, they departed.
On that day Sadducees came to him, those who claim to be no resurrection. And they questioned him, saying,
Teacher, Moses said, If some man dies, having no children, his brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed to his brother.
Now there were with us seven brothers. And the first having married perished. And having no seed left his wife to his brother.
Likewise also the second, and the third, until the seventh.
And last of all, the woman also died.
In the resurrection therefore, which of the seven will she be wife? For they all had her.
But having answered, Jesus said to them, Ye are led astray, not knowing the scriptures, nor the power of God.
For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as agents of God in heaven.
But concerning the resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was spoken to you by God, saying,
I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not God of the dead, but of the living.
And when the multitudes heard it, they were astonished at his doctrine.
But the Pharisees, having heard that he silenced the Sadducees, they came together in the same place.
And one of them, a lawyer, questioned, trying him, and saying,
Teacher, which is the great commandment in the law?
And Jesus said to him, Thou shall love the Lord thy God with thy whole heart, and with thy whole soul, and with thy whole mind.
This is the first and great commandment.
And the second is like it, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets.
Now the Pharisees having been gathered together, Jesus interrogated them, saying,
What does it seem to you about the Christ? Whose son is he? They say to him, Of David.
He says to them, How then does David in Spirit call him Lord, saying,
The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until I place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet?
If David therefore calls him Lord, how is he his son?
And no man was able to answer him a word, nor did any man from that day dare to question him any more.

Then Jesus spoke to the multitudes and to his disciples, saying,
The scholars and the Pharisees sit on Moses' seat.
All things therefore, however many they may tell you to observe, observe and do, but do not ye according to their works, for they say, and do not.
For they bind heavy burdens and difficult to bear, and lay them on men's shoulders, but they do not want to move them with their finger.
But all their works they do in order to be seen by men. And they make broad their phylacteries, and enlarge the hems of their garments.
And they love the chief place at feasts, and the chief seats in the synagogues,
and the greetings in the marketplaces, and to be designated by men, Rabbi, Rabbi.
But be ye not designated Rabbi, for one is your leader, the Christ, and ye are all brothers.
And do not designate a father of you upon the earth, for one is your Father, he in the heavens.
And be ye not designated leaders, for one is your leader, the Christ.
But the greater of you will be your helper.
And he who will exalt himself will be made low, and he who will make himself low will be exalted.
Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye close up the kingdom of the heavens ahead of men. For ye enter not in, nor do ye allow those who are entering to enter in.
But woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye devour widows' houses, and praying long in pretence. Because of this ye will receive greater condemnation.
Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye encompass the sea and the land to make one proselyte, and when it happens, ye make him twice more a son of hell than yourselves.
Woe to you, ye blind guides, who say, Whoever may swear by the temple, it is nothing, but whoever may swear by the gold of the temple, he is obligated.
Ye foolish and blind men, for which is greater, the gold, or the temple that makes the gold sacred?
And, Whoever may swear by the altar, it is nothing, but whoever may swear by the gift upon it, he is obligated.
Ye foolish and blind men, for which is greater, the gift, or the altar that makes the gift sacred?
He therefore who swears by the altar, swears by it, and by all things on it.
And he who swears by the temple, swears by it, and by him who dwells in it.
And he who swears by heaven, swears by the throne of God, and by him who sits upon it.
Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye tithe the mint and the anise and the cummin, and have omitted the weightier matters of the law-justice and mercy and faith. These things must be done, and not neglecting those things.
Ye blind guides, who strain out the gnat, and swallow the camel.
Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter, but inside they are full of plunder and unrighteousness.
Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first the inside of the cup and of the platter, so that the outside of them may also become clean.
Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye are like whitewashed tombs, which indeed appear beautiful outwardly, but inside are full of dead men's bones, and of all uncleanness.
In this way also, ye indeed outwardly appear righteous to men, but inside ye are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
Woe to you, scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye build the tombs of the prophets, and adorn the sepulchers of the righteous,
and say, If we had been in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.
So then ye testify to yourselves that ye are sons of those who murdered the prophets.
Then fill ye up the measure of your fathers.
Ye serpents, ye offspring of vipers, how will ye escape from the damnation of hell?
Because of this, behold, I send to you prophets, and wise men, and scholars. And some of them ye will kill and crucify, and some of them ye will scourge in your synagogues, and will persecute from city to city,
so that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed on the earth, from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zachariah son of Barachiah, whom ye murdered between the sanctuary and the altar.
Truly I say to you, that all these things will come upon this generation.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, who kills the prophets, and stones those who have been sent to her. How often I wanted to gathered thy children together the way a hen gathers her chicks under her wings, and ye would not.
Behold, your house is left to you desolate.
For I say to you, ye will, no, not see me henceforth, until ye say, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.

And when Jesus departed he was going from the temple. And his disciples came near to exhibit to him the buildings of the temple.
But Jesus said to them, Do ye not see all these things? Truly I say to you, there will be left here, no, not a stone upon a stone, that will not be thrown down.
And as he sat on the mount of Olives, the disciples came to him privately, saying, Tell us, when will these things be? And what is the sign of thy coming, and of the termination of the age?
And having answered, Jesus said to them, See that not any man may lead you astray.
For many will come in my name, saying, I am the Christ, and will lead many astray.
And ye are going to hear of wars and rumors of wars. See that ye not be alarmed, for all the things must happen, but the end is not yet.
For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be famines and plagues and earthquakes in places.
But all these things are the beginning of travail.
Then they will deliver you up for tribulation, and will kill you, and ye will be hated by all the nations because of my name.
And then many will be caused to stumble, and they will betray each other and will hate each other.
And many false prophets will arise, and will lead many astray.
And because of the increased lawlessness, the love of the many will become cold.
But he who endures to the end, this man will be saved.
And this good news of the kingdom will be proclaimed in the whole world for a testimony to all the nations, and then the end will come.
When therefore ye see the abomination of desolation that was spoken of through Daniel the prophet, standing in the holy place (let him who reads understand),
then let those in Judea flee to the mountains.
Let the man on the housetop not go down to take things from his house.
And let the man in the field not return back to take his clothes.
And woe to those who have in the womb and to those who suckle in those days.
And pray ye that your flight may not happen in winter, nor on a sabbath,
for then there will be great tribulation, such as not has happened from the beginning of the world until now, nor, no, it will not happen.
And if those days were not shortened, no flesh would be saved. But because of the chosen those days will be shortened.
Then if any man should say to you, Lo, here is the Christ, or, Here, believe ye not.
For there will arise false Christs and false prophets, and they will give great signs and wonders, so as to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen.
Behold, I have foretold it to you.
If therefore they should say to you, Behold, he is in the wilderness, do not go forth. Behold, he is in the inner chambers, do not believe.
For as the lightning comes out from the east, and shines as far as the west, so also will be the coming of the Son of man.
For wherever the carcass may be, there the vultures will be gathered together.
But straightaway after the tribulation of those days the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light. And the stars will fall from the sky, and the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
And then the sign of the Son of man will appear in the sky. And then all the tribes of the earth will beat the breast, and they will see the Son of man coming in the clouds of the sky with power and much glory.
And he will send forth his agents with a great trumpet sound, and they will gather together his chosen from the four winds, from the boundaries of the heavens-as far as their boundaries.
Now learn a parable from the fig tree. When its branch now becomes tender, and sprouts leaves, ye know that the summer is near.
So ye also, when ye see all these things, know that it is near, at the doors.
Truly I say to you, this generation will, no, not pass away, until all these things happen.
The sky and the earth will pass away, but my words may, no, not pass away.
But about that day and hour no man knows, not even the agents of the heavens, except my Father only.
And as the days of Noah, so also will be the coming of the Son of man.
For as in the days before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage until that day Noah entered into the ark.
And they knew not until the flood came, and took them all away. So also will be the coming of the Son of man.
Then two men will be in the field, one is taken, and one is left.
Two women grinding at the mill, one is taken, and one is left.
Watch therefore, because ye know not at what hour your Lord comes.
But know this, that if the house-ruler had known in what watch the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have allowed his house to be broken into.
Because of this ye also be ready, because in that hour ye think not the Son of man comes.
Who then is the faithful and wise bondman, whom his lord appointed over his service, to give them the provision on time?
Blessed is that bondman, whom his lord when he comes will find so doing.
Truly I say to you, that he will appoint him over all things being possessed by him.
But if that evil bondman should say in his heart, My lord is late coming,
and should begin to beat the fellow bondmen, and to eat and drink with the drunken,
the lord of that bondman will come in a day that he does not expect, and in an hour that he is not aware,
and he will cut him in two, and place his share with the hypocrites. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.

Then the kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins, who, having taken their lamps, went forth to the bridegroom's gathering.
And five of them were wise, and five were foolish,
foolish women, who, having taken their lamps, took no olive oil with them.
But the wise took olive oil in their vessels with their lamps.
Now while the bridegroom delayed, they all slumbered and slept.
But at midnight a shout occurred, Behold, the bridegroom comes! Go ye forth for his gathering.
Then all those virgins were roused, and put their lamps in order.
And the foolish said to the wise, Give us from your olive oil, because our lamps are going out.
But the wise answered, saying, Perhaps there may not be enough for us and you. But go ye rather to those who sell, and buy for yourselves.
And while they went to buy, the bridegroom came. And the prepared entered in with him for the wedding festivities, and the door was shut.
But afterward the other virgins also came, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us.
But having answered, he said, Truly I say to you, I know you not.
Watch therefore, because ye know not the day nor the hour in which the Son of man comes.
For, like a man going on a journey, he called his own bondmen, and delivered to them the things possessed by him.
And to one he gave five talents, to another two, to another one, to each according to his personal ability, and straightaway he journeyed.
And having departed, the man who received the five talents worked with them, and made five other talents.
And likewise also the man of the two gained two others.
But having departed, the man who received the one dug in the ground, and hid his lord's silver.
Now after a long time the lord of those bondmen comes, and takes up accounting with them.
And having come, the man who received the five talents brought five other talents, saying, Lord, thou delivered five talents to me, lo, I have gained five other talents besides them.
And his lord said to him, Well, good and faithful bondman. Thou were faithful over a few things, I will appoint thee over many things. Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
And also having come, the man who received the two talents said, Lord, thou delivered two talents to me, lo, I have gained two other talents besides them.
His lord said to him, Well, good and faithful bondman. Thou were faithful over a few things, I will appoint thee over many things. Enter thou into the joy of thy lord.
And the man who received the one talent also having come, said, Lord, I knew thee that thou are a hard man, reaping where thou did not sow, and gathering from where thou did not scatter.
And after being afraid, having gone, I hid thy talent in the ground. Lo, thou have thine own.
But having answered, his lord said to him, Thou evil and lazy bondman, thou knew that I reap where I sowed not, and gather from where I did not scatter.
Thou ought therefore to have placed my silver with the bankers, and having come I would have received back my own with interest.
Take ye therefore the talent from him, and give it to him who has the ten talents.
For to every man who has will be given, and he will have abundance, but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away from him.
And cast ye the unprofitable bondman into the outer darkness. There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth.
But when the Son of man comes in his glory, and all the holy agents with him, then he will sit on the throne of his glory.
And all the nations will be gathered before him, and he will separate them from each other, as the shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
And he will truly place the sheep at his right hand, but the goats at the left.
Then the King will say to those at his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
For I was hungry, and ye gave me to eat. I was thirsty, and ye gave me to drink. I was a stranger, and ye took me in,
naked, and ye clothed me. I was feeble, and ye came to help me. I was in prison, and ye came to me.
Then the righteous will answer him, saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungering, and fed thee, or thirsting, and gave thee drink?
And when did we see thee a stranger, and took thee in, or naked, and clothed thee?
And when did we see thee weak, or in prison, and came to thee?
And having answered, the King will say to them, Truly I say to you, inasmuch as ye did it to one of these my brothers, the least, ye did it to me.
Then he will also say to those at the left hand, Depart from me, ye accursed, into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his agents.
For I was hungry, and ye did not give me to eat, I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink,
I was a stranger, and ye did not take me in, naked, and ye did not clothe me, weak, and in prison, and ye did not come to help me.
Then they will also answer, saying, Lord, when did we see thee hungering, or thirsting, or a stranger, or naked, or weak, or in prison, and did not serve thee?
Then he will answer them, saying, Truly I say to you, inasmuch as ye did it not to one of these least, ye did it not to me.
And these will go away into eternal punishment, but the righteous into eternal life.

And it came to pass, when Jesus had finished all these saying, he said to his disciples,
Ye know that after two days the Passover comes, and the Son of man is betrayed to be crucified.
Then the chief priests, and the scholars, and the elders of the people, assembled together to the courtyard of the high priest, who was called Caiaphas,
and they deliberated so that they might take Jesus by trickery, and kill him.
But they said, Not during the feast, lest an uproar develop among people.
Now when Jesus happened to be in Bethany, in the house of Simon the leper,
a woman came to him having an alabaster cruse of precious ointment, and she poured it upon his head as he sat relaxing.
But when his disciples saw it, they were indignant, saying, Why this waste?
For this ointment could have been sold for much, and given to the poor.
But Jesus knowing it, he said to them, Why do ye cause troubles to the woman? For she has wrought a good work upon me.
For ye always have the poor with you, but ye do not always have me.
For by pouring this ointment upon my body, she did it for my burial.
Truly I say to you, wherever this good news may be proclaimed in the whole world, what this woman did will also be told for a memorial of her.
Then one of the twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot, having gone to the chief priests,
he said, What are ye willing to give me, and I will deliver him to you? And they weighed out to him thirty silver pieces.
And from that time he sought a favorable opportunity so that he might betray him.
Now on the first day of unleavened bread the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where do thou want that we should prepare for thee to eat the Passover?
And he said, Go into the city to a certain man, and say to him, The teacher says, My time is near. I keep the Passover with my disciples with thee.
And the disciples did as Jesus arranged for them, and they prepared the Passover.
Now having become evening, he was sitting with the twelve.
And as they were eating, he said, Truly I say to you, that one of you will betray me.
And being exceedingly sorrowful, they began, each of them, to say to him, Is it I, Lord?
And having answered, he said, He who dipped his hand with me in the dish, this man will betray me.
The Son of man indeed goes as it is written about him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It were good for him if that man had not been born.
And Judas (the man who betrayed him) having answered, he said, Is it I, Rabbi? He says to him, Thou have said.
And as they were eating, Jesus, having taken bread, having expressed thanks, broke in pieces, and he gave to the disciples, and said, Take, eat, this is my body.
And having taken the cup, having expressed thanks, he gave to them, saying, All ye drink of it,
for this is my blood of the new covenant, which is shed on behalf of many for remission of sins.
But I say to you, that I will, no, not drink of this fruit of the grapevine henceforth until that day when I drink it new with you in my Father's kingdom.
And having sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives.
Then Jesus says to them, All ye will be caused to stumble by me in this night, for it is written, I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep of the flock will be scattered.
But after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee.
But having answered, Peter said to him, If all men will be caused to stumble by thee, I will never be caused to stumble.
Jesus said to him, Truly I say to thee, that in this night, before a cock sounds, thou will deny me thrice.
Peter says to him, Even if I must die with thee, I will, no, not deny thee. And likewise also, said all the disciples.
Then Jesus comes with them to a place called Gethsemane, and he says to his disciples, Sit ye here until, after going, I may pray there.
And having taken Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, he began to be sorrowful and distressed.
Then Jesus says to them, My soul is deeply grieved, as far as of death. Remain ye here and watch with me.
And having gone forward a little, he fell on his face praying, and saying, My Father, if it be possible, may this cup pass from me. Nevertheless, not as I want, but as thou.
And he comes to the disciples, and finds them sleeping. And he says to Peter, So ye could not watch with me one hour.
Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation. Truly, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
Having gone again a second time, he prayed, saying, My Father, if it is not possible for this cup to pass from me, except I drink it, may thy will happen.
And having come again, he finds them sleeping, for their eyes were heavy.
And when he left them, having gone away again, he prayed a third time, saying again the same statement.
Then he comes to his disciples, and says to them, Sleep what remains, and take rest. Behold, the hour has come near, and the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Awake, we go. Behold, he who betrays me has come near.
And while he was still speaking, lo, Judas, one of the twelve, came, and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs from the chief priest and elders of the people.
Now the man who betrayed him gave them a sign, saying, Whomever I may kiss is he. Seize him.
And straightaway having come to Jesus, he said, Hail, Rabbi, and kissed him much.
And Jesus said to him, Friend, why are thou here? Then having come, they threw their hands on Jesus, and seized him.
And behold, one of those with Jesus, having stretched out a hand, drew his sword, and when he struck the bondman of the high priest, he cut off his ear.
Then Jesus says to him, Return thy sword into its place, for all those who take a sword will die by a sword.
Or do thou think that I cannot now call my Father, and he will provide to me more than twelve legions of agents?
How then would the scriptures be fulfilled that it is necessary to happen this way?
In that hour Jesus said to the multitudes, Did ye come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to seize me? I sat daily with you teaching in the temple, and ye did not seize me.
But all this has come to pass, so that the scriptures of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples fled, having forsook him.
And those who seized Jesus led him away to Caiaphas the high priest where the scholars and the elders were assembled together.
But Peter followed him from afar, as far as the courtyard of the high priest. And having entered inside, he sat with the subordinates to see the outcome.
Now the chief priests and the elders and the whole council sought false testimony against Jesus, so that they might put him to death,
and they did not find it. And although many false witnesses came, they did not find it.
But finally two false witnesses having come, they said, This man said, I am able to destroy the temple of God, and to build it by three days.
And the high priest having stood up, he said to him, Answer thou nothing? What do these testify against thee?
But Jesus was silent. And having responded, the high priest said to him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us if thou are the Christ, the Son of God.
Jesus says to him, Thou have said. Nevertheless I say to you, Henceforth ye will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming in the clouds of the sky.
Then the high priest tore his garments, saying, He has blasphemed. What further need have we of witnesses? Behold, now ye heard his blasphemy.
What does it seem to you? Having answered, they said, He is deserving of death.
Then they spat in his face and struck him with a fist. And some slapped him,
saying, Prophesy to us, thou Christ. Who is he who struck thee?
Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard, and one servant girl came to him, saying, Thou also were with Jesus the Galilean.
But he denied before them all, saying, I do not know what thou say.
And when he was gone out into the porch, another woman saw him, and says to them there, This man was also with Jesus the Nazarene.
And again he denied with an oath, I do not know the man.
And after a little while those who stood, having approached, said to Peter, Surely thou also are of them, for thy accent even makes thee apparent.
Then he began to curse vehemently and to swear, I do not know the man. And straightaway a cock sounded.
And Peter remembered the saying that Jesus said to him, Before a cock sounds, thou will deny me thrice. And having gone outside, he wept bitterly.

But having become morning, all the chief priests and the elders of the people held consultation against Jesus in order to condemn him to death.
And having bound him, they led him away and delivered him to Pontius Pilate the governor.
Then Judas, who betrayed him, after seeing that he was condemned, having repented, he brought back the thirty silver pieces to the chief priests and elders,
saying, I sinned, having betrayed innocent blood. But they said, What is it to us? See thou to it.
And having cast down the silver pieces in the temple, he departed, and after going away, he hanged himself.
And after taking the silver pieces, the chief priests said, It is not permitted to put them into the treasury, since it is a price of blood.
And having held consultation, they bought the potter's field with them for burial for foreigners.
Therefore that field was called the field of blood, to this day.
Then that which was spoken through Jeremiah the prophet was fulfilled, which says, And they took the thirty silver pieces, the price of him who was valued, whom they valued from the sons of Israel,
and they gave them for the potter's field, as the Lord appointed me.
Now Jesus stood before the governor, and the governor questioned him, saying, Are thou the king of the Jews? And Jesus said to him, Thou say.
And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, he answered nothing.
Then Pilate says to him, Do thou not hear how many things they testify against thee?
And he did not answer him, not even one word, so as for the governor to marvel greatly.
Now during a feast the governor had been accustomed to release to the crowd one prisoner whom they wanted.
And they had then a notorious prisoner called Barabbas.
When therefore they were gathered together, Pilate said to them, Whom do ye want I should release to you? Barabbas, or Jesus who is called Christ?
For he knew that they delivered him up because of envy.
And while he was sitting on the judgment seat, his wife sent to him, saying, There is nothing for thee and that righteous man. For I suffered many things this day in a dream because of him.
But the chief priests and the elders persuaded the multitudes that they should ask for Barabbas, and destroy Jesus.
Now the governor having answered, he said to them, Which of the two do ye want I would release to you? And they said, Barabbas.
Pilate says to them, What then shall I do to Jesus who is called Christ? They all say to him, He should be crucified.
And the governor said, For what evil has he done? But they cried out even more, saying, He should be crucified.
And when Pilate saw that he was accomplishing nothing, but rather an uproar was developing, after taking water, he washed his hands in front of the multitude, saying, I am innocent of the blood of this righteous man. See ye to it.
And having answered, all the people said, His blood be on us, and on our children.
Then he released Barabbas to them, and having scourged Jesus he delivered him so that he would be crucified.
Then the soldiers of the governor, having taken Jesus into the Praetorium, gathered the whole band to him.
And having stripped him, they put a scarlet robe on him.
And having woven a crown of thorns, they put it upon his head, and a reed in his right hand. And having knelt down before him, they ridiculed him, saying, Hail, king of the Jews!
And having spat upon him, they took the reed and were striking him on his head.
And after they ridiculed him, they took the robe off of him, and put his clothes on him, and led him away in order to crucify.
And while coming out, they found a man of Cyrene, Simon by name. They drafted this man, so that he might take his cross.
And having come to a place called Golgotha, that is called, the place of a skull,
they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall. And having tasted it, he would not drink.
And when they crucified him, they divided his garments, casting a lot.
And as they sat, they keep watch over him there.
And they set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Then two robbers are crucified with him, one at the right hand and one at the left.
And those who passed by reviled him, shaking their heads,
and saying, Thou who destroy the temple, and build it in three days, save thyself. If thou are the Son of God, come down from the cross.
And likewise also the chief priests, ridiculing with the scholars, and elders, and Pharisees, said,
He saved others, he cannot save himself. If he is the king of Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe in him.
He trusted in God, let him rescue him now, if he wants him, for he said, I am the Son of God.
And also the robbers who were crucified with him reviled him the same way.
Now from the sixth hour darkness developed over all the land until the ninth hour.
And about the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a great voice, saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? That is, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
And some of those who stood there, when they heard it, said, This man calls Elijah.
And straightaway one of them, after running, and having taken a sponge, and having filled it with vinegar, put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.
But the others said, Leave thou be. We might see if Elijah comes he will save him.
And Jesus, having cried out again in a great voice, yielded up his spirit.
And behold, the curtain of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom, and the earth quaked, and the rocks split,
and the sepulchers were opened, and many bodies of the sanctified who have been asleep arose.
And having come forth out of the sepulchers after his resurrection they entered into the holy city and appeared to many.
Now the centurion, and those with him watching over Jesus, when they saw the earthquake, and the things that happened, they feared greatly, saying, Truly this was the Son of God.
And many women were there watching from afar, who followed Jesus from Galilee, serving him,
among whom was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
And having become evening, there came a rich man from Arimathaea, named Joseph, who also himself was discipled by Jesus.
This man having come to Pilate, requested the body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be given.
And Joseph having taken the body, wrapped it in a clean linen cloth,
and laid it in his own new sepulcher, which he hewed out in the rock. And having rolled a great stone to the door of the sepulcher, he departed.
And Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary were there, sitting opposite the tomb.
Now on the morrow, which is after the Preparation, the chief priests and the Pharisees came together to Pilate,
saying, Sir, we remember that that deceiver said while he was still alive, After three days I am raised.
Command therefore to secure the tomb until the third day, lest his disciples having come by night steal him away, and say to the people, He was raised from the dead. And the last error will be worse than the first.
Pilate said to them, Ye have security. Go, make it as secure as ye know how.
And having gone, they made the tomb secure, with the security having sealed the stone.

Now late on the sabbath day, being dawn toward the first day of the week, Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb.
And behold, a great earthquake occurred, for an agent of the Lord, having descended from heaven, having come, he rolled the stone away from the door and sat upon it.
And his appearance was as lightning and his clothing white as snow.
And those watching over shook from fear of him, and became as dead men.
And having responded, the agent said to the women, Fear ye not, for I know that ye seek Jesus, who was crucified.
He is not here, for he was raised as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay.
And after going quickly, tell his disciples, He was raised from the dead, and lo, he goes before you into Galilee. There ye will see him. Behold, I have told you.
And after coming out quickly from the sepulcher with fear and great joy, they ran to notify his disciples.
And as they were going to tell his disciples, behold, Jesus also met them, saying, Hail. And having come, they held his feet and worshiped him.
Then Jesus says to them, Fear not. Go notify my brothers that they should depart into Galilee, and there they will see me.
Now while they were going, behold, some of the security having come into the city, reported to the chief priests all the things that happened.
And after assembling with the elders, and having taken consultation, they gave many silver pieces to the soldiers, saying,
Say ye, His disciples, having come by night, stole him from us while we slept.
And if this should be heard by the governor, we will persuade him, and will make you worry free.
And having taken the silver pieces, they did as they were instructed. And this saying was spread abroad among the Jews until this day.
But the eleven disciples went for Galilee to the mountain where Jesus arranged for them.
And when they saw him, they worshiped him, but men doubted.
And Jesus having come, he spoke to them, saying, All authority in heaven and on earth was given to me.
After going, make ye disciples of all the nations, immersing them into the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit,
teaching them to observe all things, as many as I commanded you. And lo, I am with you all the days, until the end of the age. Truly.

Mark

The beginning of the good news of Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
As it is written in the prophets, Behold, I send my agent before thy face, who will prepare thy way before thee.
Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.
It came to pass, that John was immersing in the wilderness and preaching an immersion of repentance for remission of sins.
And all the land of Judea and the Jerusalemites went out to him, and they were all immersed by him in the river Jordan, confessing their sins.
And John was clothed with camel's hair and a leather belt around his waist, and eating locusts and wild honey.
And he preached, saying, A man mightier than I comes after me of whom I am not worthy, having stooped down, to loosen the strap of his shoes.
I indeed immersed you in water, but he will immerse you in the Holy Spirit.
And it came to pass in those days, that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was immersed by John in the Jordan.
And straightaway coming up out of the water, he saw the heavens divided, and the Spirit descending upon him as a dove.
And a voice occurred out of the heavens, Thou are my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
And straightaway the Spirit drives him forth into the wilderness.
And he was there in the wilderness forty days tempted by Satan. And he was with the wild beasts. And the agents served him.
Now after John was delivered up, Jesus came into Galilee proclaiming the good news of God,
and saying, The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God has come near. Repent ye, and believe in the good news.
And walking beside the sea of Galilee he saw Simon and Andrew his brother, the son of Simon, casting a net in the sea, for they were fishermen.
And Jesus said to them, Come ye behind me, and I will make you to become fishermen of men.
And straightaway they left the nets, and followed him.
And having advanced a little from there he saw James the son of Zebedee, and John his brother, who were also in the boat mending the nets.
And straightaway he called them. And having left their father Zebedee in the boat with the workmen, they went behind him.
And they entered into Capernaum, and straightaway on the sabbath day, having entered into the synagogue, he taught.
And they were astonished at his teaching, for he was teaching them as having authority, and not as the scholars.
And a man was in their synagogue with an unclean spirit. And he cried out,
saying, Oh no! What is with us and with thee, Jesus of Nazareth? Did thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou are, the Holy man of God.
And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Be thou muzzled, and come out of him.
And the unclean spirit, having convulsed him and having cried in a great voice, came out of him.
And they were all amazed, so as to question among themselves, saying, What is this? What is this new doctrine, that he commands with authority, and the unclean spirits also obey him?
And his fame went forth straightaway into the entire region around Galilee.
And straightaway, when they came forth out of the synagogue they came into the house of Simon and Andrew, with James and John.
But Simon's mother-in-law lay feverish, and straightaway they tell him about her.
And upon coming, having taken hold of her hand, he raised her up and the fever left her. And straightaway she served them.
And having become evening when the sun set they brought to him all who were faring badly, and those who were demon-possessed.
And the whole city was gathered together near the door.
And he healed many who were faring badly with various diseases, and cast out many demons. And he did not allow the demons to speak, because they had recognized him.
And having risen early, very much in the night, he came out and departed into a desolate place, and prayed there.
And Simon and those with him searched for him.
And having found him, they say to him, All are seeking thee.
And he says to them, Let us go into the nearby towns, so that I may preach there also. For I came forth for this.
And he was preaching in their synagogues in all Galilee, and casting out the demons.
And a leper comes to him beseeching him, and kneeling down to him, and saying to him, If thou will thou can make me clean.
And Jesus, having felt compassion, having reached out his hand, he touched him, and says to him, I will, be thou clean.
And after he spoke, straightaway the leprosy departed from him, and he was cleansed.
And having strictly warned him, straightaway he sent him out.
And he says to him, See thou say nothing to any man, but go, show thyself to the priest, and bring for thy cleansing the things that Moses commanded for a testimony to them.
But having gone out, he began to proclaim it much, and to spread abroad the matter, so as for him to no longer be able to enter openly into a city, but was outside in desolate places. And they came to him from all directions.

And having again entered into Capernaum, after some days it was heard that he was in a house.
And straightaway many were gathered together, so as to accommodate no more, not even near the door. And he spoke the word to them.
And they come bringing to him a paralyzed man, being taken by four men.
And not being able to come near to him because of the crowd, they uncovered the roof where he was. And when they had broken through, they let down the bed on which the paralyzed man lay.
And having seen their faith, Jesus says to the paralyzed man, Child, thy sins are forgiven thee.
But some of the scholars were sitting there, and deliberating in their hearts,
Why does this man speak blasphemies this way. Who can forgive sins but one, God?
And straightaway Jesus, having perceived in his spirit that they so deliberated within themselves, said to them, Why do ye deliberate these things in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say to the paralyzed man, Thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise, and take up thy bed and walk?
But that ye may know that the Son of man has authority on earth to forgive sins (he says to the paralyzed man),
I say to thee, Arise, and take up thy bed, and go to thy house.
And straightaway he arose, and having taken up the bed, he went forth before them all, so as for all to be amazed, and to glorify God, saying, We never saw it like this.
And he went forth again by the sea, and all the multitude resorted to him, and he taught them.
And as he passed by he saw Levi the son of Alphaeus sitting at the tax office. And he says to him, Follow thou me. And having risen, he followed him.
And it came to pass, while he was dining in his house, that many tax collectors and sinners were dining with Jesus and his disciples, for there were many, and they followed him.
And the scholars of the Pharisees, when they saw him eating with the tax collectors and sinners, they said to his disciples, Why is it that he eats and drinks with tax collectors and sinners?
And when Jesus heard it he says to them, Those who are strong have no need of a physician, but those faring badly. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners for repentance.
And John's disciples and those of the Pharisees were fasting. And they come and say to him, Why do John's disciples and those of the Pharisees fast, but the disciples with you do not fast?
And Jesus said to them, The sons of the wedding hall cannot fast while the bridegroom is with them. As long as they have the bridegroom with them, they cannot fast.
But the days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them, and then they will they fast in those day.
And no man sews a new patch of cloth on an old garment, otherwise the patch of it pulls away, the new from the old, and a tear becomes worse.
And no man puts new wine into old wineskins, otherwise the new wine bursts the wineskins, and the wine is spilled, and the wineskins will be destroyed. But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins.
And it came to pass, that he was passing through the grain fields on the sabbath day, and his disciples began to make a path while plucking the ears.
And the Pharisees said to him, Look, why are they doing what is not permitted on the sabbath day?
And he said to them, Did ye never read what David did when he had need, and was hungry, he and those with him?
How he entered into the house of God under Abiathar the high priest, and ate the loaves of the presentation, which is not permitted to eat except for the priests. And he also gave to those who were with him?
And he said to them, The sabbath came into being for sake of man, and not man for sake of the sabbath.
So then the Son of man is lord even of the sabbath.

And he entered again into the synagogue, and a man was there who had a withered hand.
And they watched him whether he would heal him on the sabbath day, so that they might accuse him.
And he says to the man who had a withered hand, Stand up in the midst.
And he says to them, Is it permitted to do good on the sabbath day or to do harm, to save life or to kill? But they were silent.
And having looked around on them with anger, being grieved at the callousness of their heart, he says to the man, Stretch forth thy hand. And he stretched it out, and his hand was restored as the other.
And the Pharisees having gone out, they straightaway were making a plot with the Herodians against him, how they might destroy him.
And Jesus withdrew with his disciples to the sea, and a great multitude from Galilee followed him.
And from Judea, and from Jerusalem, and from Idumaea, and beyond the Jordan, and around Tyre and Sidon, a great multitude, having heard how many things he did, came to him.
And he spoke to his disciples that a small boat would stay by him because of the crowd, lest they should throng him.
For he healed many, so as to press upon him, so that as many as had afflictions might touch him.
And the unclean spirits, whenever they saw him, fell down before him, and cried out, saying, Thou are the Son of God.
And he chided them much that they should not make him known.
And he goes up onto the mountain, and calls in those whom he himself wanted, and they went to him.
And he appointed twelve men, so that they might be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach,
and to have authority to heal diseases and to cast out demons.
And he added to Simon the name Peter;
and James the son of Zebedee, and John the brother of James, and he added to them the name Boanerges, which is, Sons of thunder;
and Andrew, and Philip, and Bartholomew, and Matthew, and Thomas, and James the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddaeus, and Simon the Canaanite,
and Judas Iscariot, who also betrayed him. And they come to a house.
And the multitude comes together again, so as for them, no, not even to be able to eat bread.
And when those with him heard it, they went out to grasp him, for they said, He is beside himself.
And the scholars who came down from Jerusalem said, He has Beelzebub, and, By the ruler of the demons he casts out the demons.
And having summoned them, he said to them in parables, How can Satan cast out Satan?
And if a kingdom be divided against itself, that kingdom cannot stand.
And if a house be divided against itself, that house cannot stand.
And if Satan has rise up against himself, and is divided, he cannot stand, but has an end.
But no man, having enter into the house of the strong man, can plunder his goods unless he first binds the strong man, and then he may plunder his house.
Truly I say to you, that all the sins will be forgiven the sons of men, and the blasphemies, as many as they may blaspheme.
But whoever may blaspheme against the Holy Spirit has no forgiveness, into the age, but is deserving of eternal damnation,
because they said, He has an unclean spirit.
Then his brothers and mother come, and standing outside, they sent to him, calling him.
And a multitude was sitting around him, and they said to him, Behold, thy mother, and thy brothers, and thy sisters, outside seek for thee.
And he answered them, saying, Who is my mother and my brothers?
And having looked around at those who sat about him, he says, Behold, my mother and my brothers.
For whoever may do the will of God, the same is my brother and sister and mother.

And again he began to teach by the sea. And a great multitude was gathered to him, so as for him, after entering into the boat, to sit on the sea, and all the multitude was by the sea on the land.
And he taught them many things in parables, and said to them in his teaching,
Listen. Behold, the man who sows went forth to sow.
And it came to pass during the sowing, some fell by the path, and the birds came and devoured it.
And others fell on the rocky ground where it had not much soil. And straightaway it sprang up, because it had no depth of soil.
And when the sun was risen it was scorched, and because it had no root it dried out.
And others fell among the thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it, and it gave no fruit.
And others fell into the good ground and gave fruit, coming up and increasing, and brought forth, one thirty, and one sixty, and one a hundred.
And he said, He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
And when he became alone, those around him, with the twelve, asked him the parable.
And he said to them, To you is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God, but to those outside, all things occur in parables.
So that seeing they may see, and not perceive, and hearing they may hear, and not understand, lest they should turn, and the sins would be forgiven them.
And he says to them, Do ye not know this parable? And how will ye understand all the parables?
The man who sows sows the word.
And these are those by the path where the word is sown. And whenever they may hear, straightaway Satan comes, and takes away the word that has been sown in their hearts.
And these in like manner are those being sown upon the rocky places, who, whenever they may hear the word, straightaway receive it with joy.
And they have no root in themselves, but are temporary. Afterward, when tribulation or persecution develops because of the word, straightaway they are caused to stumble.
And these are those being sown in the thorns, who hear the word,
and the cares of this age, and the deceitfulness of wealth, and the cravings about other things entering in, choke the word, and it becomes unfruitful.
And these are those that were sown upon the good ground, who hear the word and receive it, and bear fruit, one thirty, and one sixty, and one a hundred.
And he said to them, Does the lamp come so that it might be put under the bushel or under the bed? Is it not so that it might be put on the lampstand?
For there is not anything hid, except that it may be revealed, nor become secret, but that it may come to be visible.
If any man has ears to hear, let him hear.
And he said to them, Watch what ye hear. By what measure ye measure, it will be measured to you, and to those who hear, it will be added to you.
For whoever has, to him it will be given. And he who has not, even what he has will be taken away from him.
And he said, Thus is the kingdom of God, as if a man should cast seed into the ground,
and should sleep and rise night and day, and the seed should sprout and lengthen, he knows not how.
For the earth bears fruit spontaneously, first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.
But when the fruit yields, straightaway he sends forth the sickle, because the harvest has come.
And he said, To what shall we liken the kingdom of God? Or by what parable shall we compare it?
It is like a grain of the mustard plant, which, when it is sown in the ground, is smaller than all the seeds upon the ground.
Yet when it is sown, it goes up and becomes greater than all the plants, and it makes great branches, so that the birds of the sky can lodge under the shade of it.
And with many such parables he spoke the word to them, as they were able to hear it.
And he did not speak to them apart from a parable, but privately he explained all things to his disciples.
And on that day, having become evening, he says to them, Let us pass through to the other side.
And having sent the multitude away, they bring him along as he was in the boat. And other small boats were also with him.
And a great storm of wind develops, and the waves were thrown into the boat, so as for it now to be filling.
And he himself was in the stern sleeping on the cushion. And they awake him, and say to him, Teacher, does it not concern thee that we perish?
And having awaken, he rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, Be quiet! Silence! And the wind ceased, and it became a great calm.
And he said to them, Why are ye cowardly this way? How have ye no faith?
And they feared a great fear, and said to each other, Who then is this, that even the wind and the sea also obey him?

And they came to the other side of the sea into the country of the Gadarenes.
And when he came out of the boat, straightaway there met him out of the sepulchers a man with an unclean spirit who had his habitation among the sepulchers.
And no man was able to bind him, not even with chains.
Because he was often bound with shackles and chains, and the chains were pulled apart by him, and the shackles broken in pieces. And no man had strength to subdue him.
And always, night and day, in the mountains and in the sepulchers, he was crying out, and cutting himself with stones.
And when he saw Jesus from a distance, he ran and worshiped him.
And having cried out in a great voice, he said, What is with me and with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I adjure thee by God, do not torment me.
For he said to him, Come out from the man, thou unclean spirit.
And he demanded him, What is thy name? And he answered, saying, My name is Legion, because we are many.
And he besought him much that he would not send them outside of the territory.
Now there was near the mountain a great herd of swine feeding.
And all the demons besought him, saying, Send us into the swine, so that we may enter into them.
And straightaway, Jesus allowed them. And the unclean spirits having come out, entered into the swine. And the herd stampeded down the slope into the sea, and were drowned in the sea. And there were about two thousand.
And those who fed the swine fled, and reported in the city and in the fields. And they came to see what it was that happened.
And they come to Jesus, and see the man who was demon-possessed, sitting, and clothed, and in his right mind (the man who had the legion), and they were afraid.
And those who saw it related to them how it happened to the man who was demon-possessed, and about the swine.
And they began to beg him to depart from their borders.
And as he entered into the boat, the man who had been demon-possessed besought him that he might be with him.
But Jesus did not allow him, but says to him, Go to thy house to thy men, and report to them how much the Lord has done for thee, and was merciful to thee.
And he departed, and began to proclaim in Decapolis how much Jesus did for him. And all men marveled.
And when Jesus crossed over again in the boat to the other side, a great multitude gathered to him, and he was near the sea.
And behold, one of the synagogue rulers comes, Jairus by name. And having seen him, he falls at his feet,
and besought him much, saying, My little daughter has a terminal condition, so that having come, thou may lay thy hands on her, that she may be saved and will live.
And he went with him, and a great multitude followed him, and they thronged him.
And a certain woman, being with an issue of blood twelve years,
and having suffered many things by many physicians, and having spent all of her things, and was helped nothing, but who became worse instead,
when she heard about Jesus, having come in the crowd from behind, she touched his garment.
For she said, If I but touch his garments, I will be healed.
And straightaway the flow of her blood was dried up, and she knew in the body that she was healed of her scourge.
And straightaway, Jesus, when he recognized in himself that power went forth from him, having turned around in the crowd, he said, Who touched my garments?
And his disciples said to him, Thou see the multitude crowding thee, and thou say, Who touched me?
And he looked around to see the woman who did this thing.
But the woman fearing and trembling, knowing what has happened to her, came and fell down before him, and told him all the truth.
And he said to her, Daughter, thy faith has healed thee. Go in peace, and be healthy from thy scourge.
While he still spoke, they come from the synagogue ruler saying, Thy daughter died, why still trouble the teacher?
But straightaway, Jesus, having heard the word spoken, says to the ruler of the synagogue, Fear not, only believe.
And he allowed no man to accompany him except Peter, and James, and John the brother of James.
And he comes to the house of the synagogue ruler, and sees a commotion, much weeping and wailing.
And when he entered in, he says to them, Why do ye make a commotion, and weep? The child did not die, but sleeps.
And they ridiculed him. But he, having put them all out, takes the father of the child and the mother and those with him, and enters in where the child was lying.
And having taken the child's hand, he says to her, Talitha cumi. Which is, being interpreted, Little girl, I say to thee, awake.
And straightaway the little girl rose up and walked, for she was twelve years old. And they were amazed with a great amazement.
And he commanded them much that no man should know this. And he said to give her to eat.

And he went out from there, and came into his fatherland, and his disciples follow him.
And having become sabbath, he began to teach in the synagogue. And many who heard him were astonished, saying, How are these things in this man? and, What is the wisdom that was given to him, and such mighty works happen by his hands?
Is this not the carpenter, the son of Mary, and brother of James and Joses and Judah and Simon? And are not his sisters here with us? And they were offended by him.
But Jesus said to them, A prophet is not without honor, except in his fatherland, and among his kin, and in his house.
And he could do no mighty work there, none, except having laid his hands upon a few feeble men he healed them.
And he marveled because of their unbelief. And he went around the villages teaching.
And he summons the twelve, and began to send them forth in pairs. And he gave them authority over the unclean spirits.
And he commanded them that they should take up nothing for the way, except only a staff-no scrip, no bread, no copper in the belt-
but shod with sandals, and, Do not wear two coats.
And he said to them, Wherever ye enter into a house, lodge there until ye depart from there.
And as many as might not receive you nor hear you, as ye depart from there, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony to them. Truly I say to you, it will be more tolerable for Sodom or Gomorrah in the day of judgment than for that city.
And having departed, they preached that men should repent.
And they cast out many demons, and anointed many feeble men with olive oil, and healed them.
And king Herod heard, for his name had become well known. And he said, John, the man who immerses, was raised from the dead, and because of this the powers work in him.
Others said, He is Elijah, and others said, He is a prophet, like one of the prophets.
But Herod, when he heard, said, This is John whom I beheaded. He was raised from the dead.
For Herod himself having sent forth, he arrested John, and bound him in prison because of Herodias, his brother Philip's wife, because he married her.
For John said to Herod, It is not permitted for thee to have thy brother's wife.
And Herodias was resentful toward him, and wanted to kill him. And she could not,
for Herod feared John, knowing him to be a righteous and holy man, and he protected him. And having heard of him-the many things he was doing-he even heard of him gladly.
And having become an opportune day, when Herod on his birthday made a dinner for his chiefs, and the high captains, and the leading men of Galilee,
and the daughter of her (of Herodias) having come in and danced, and having pleased Herod and those who sat with the king, he said to the maiden, Ask of me whatever thou may want, and I will give to thee.
And he swore to her, Whatever thou may ask of me, I will give to thee, as much as half of my kingdom.
And having gone out, she said to her mother, What shall I ask? And she said, The head of John the immerser.
And having come in straightaway with haste to the king, she asked, saying, I want that thou may give me, of it on a platter, the head of John the immerser.
And the king, who became exceeding sorry, did not want to refuse her because of the oaths, and of those dining together.
And straightaway having sent an executioner, the king commanded his head to be brought. And having departed, he beheaded him in the prison,
and brought his head on a platter, and gave it to the maiden. And the maiden gave it to her mother.
And when his disciples heard, they came and took up his corpse, and laid it in a sepulcher.
And the apostles gather together to Jesus, and reported all to him, and how many things they did, and how many things they taught.
And he said to them, Come ye yourselves in private into a desolate place, and rest a while. For there were many coming and going, and they had no opportunity even to eat.
And they departed in the boat to a desolate place in private.
And they saw them going. And many recognized him, and ran together on foot there from all the cities. And they went before them, and came together to him.
And Jesus having come out, he saw a great multitude. And he felt compassion toward them, because they were as sheep not having a shepherd. And he began to teach them many things.
And now many an hour having come to pass, his disciples having come to him, they say, The place is desolate, and it is now many an hour.
Send them away, so that after going into the fields and villages around, they may buy loaves for themselves, for they do not have what they may eat.
But having answered, he said to them, Give ye them to eat. And they say to him, After departing, shall we buy loaves of two hundred denarii, and give them to eat?
And he says to them, How many loaves have ye? Go and see. And when they knew, they say, Five, and two fishes.
And he commanded them to sit down, all by companies upon the green grass.
And they sat down in groups, by hundreds and by fifties.
And after taking the five loaves and the two fishes, having looked up to heaven, he blessed, and broke the loaves in pieces, and he gave to the disciples so that they might set before them. And he distributed the two fishes to them all.
And they all ate, and were filled.
And they took up fragments, twelve baskets full, and from the fishes.
And those who ate the loaves were five thousand men.
And straightaway he compelled his disciples to enter into the boat, and to go ahead to the other side, to Bethsaida, while he himself would send the crowd away.
And after sending them away, he departed onto the mountain to pray.
And having become evening, the boat was in the midst of the sea, and he alone on the land.
And he saw them toiling in rowing, for the wind was against them. And about the fourth watch of the night he comes to them, walking on the sea, and wanted to passed by them.
But they, when they saw him walking on the sea, supposed it to be a ghost, and cried out.
For they all saw him, and were troubled. And straightaway he spoke with them, and says to them, Cheer up. It is I, fear not.
And he went up to them into the boat, and the wind ceased. And they were exceedingly amazed in themselves, extraordinarily so. And they wondered,
for they did not understand about the loaves, for their heart was hardened.
And having crossed over, they came to the land of Gennesaret, and moored to the shore.
And when they came out of the boat, straightaway, having recognized him,
after running around that whole region around, they began to carry about on beds those who were faring badly, where they heard he was there.
And wherever he entered, into villages or cities or fields, they laid those who were feeble in the marketplaces, and besought him that if they might but touch the hem of his garment. And as many as touched him were being healed.

And the Pharisees, and some of the scholars, having come from Jerusalem, gathered in to him.
And having seen some of his disciples eating their loaves with profane hands, that is, unwashed, they accused them.
(For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, unless they wash their hands carefully, do not eat, holding the tradition of the elders.
washings of cups, and pots, and brazen vessels, and beds.)
Then the Pharisees and the scholars demand of him, Why do thy disciples not walk according to the tradition of the elders, but eat their bread with unwashed hands?
And having answered, he said to them, Well did Isaiah prophesy about you hypocrites, as it is written, This people honors me with their lips, but their heart is far distant from me.
But in vain they worship me, teaching as doctrines the commandments of men.
washings of pots and cups and many other such like things ye do.
And he said to them, Well do ye reject the commandment of God, so that ye may keep your tradition.
For Moses said, Honor thy father and thy mother, and, He who speaks evil of father or mother, let him perish in death.
But ye say, If a man should say to his father or mother, Whatever ye might be benefited from me is Corban, that is, an offering,
then ye no longer allow him to do anything for his father or his mother,
annulling the word of God by your tradition that ye have delivered. And many such like things ye do.
And having summoned all the people, he said to them, Hear me all of you, and understand.
There is nothing outside the man, entering into him that can defile him, but the things coming out of him those are the things that defile the man.
If any man has ears to hear, let him hear.
And when he entered into a house from the crowd, his disciples questioned him about the parable.
And he says to them, Are also ye so without understanding? Do ye not perceive that everything outside that enters into the man cannot defile him,
because it does not enter into his heart, but into the belly, and goes out into the toilet (making all foods clean)?
And he said, That which comes out of the man, that defiles the man.
For from inside the heart of men proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts,
covetings, wickednesses, deceit, licentiousness, an evil eye, reviling, pride, foolishness.
All these evil things come from inside, and defile the man.
And having risen from there, he went away into the borders of Tyre and Sidon. And having entered into a house, he wanted no man to know it, and yet he could not be hid.
For a woman whose little daughter had an unclean spirit, after hearing about him, having come, she fell down at his feet.
Now the woman was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by race. And she besought him that he would cast out the demon from her daughter.
And Jesus said to her, Allow the children first be filled, for it is not right to take the children's bread and cast it to the house dogs.
But she answered and says to him, Yes, Lord, for even the house dogs under the table eat of the children's crumbs.
And he said to her, Because of this saying, go thou. The demon has gone out of thy daughter.
And having departed to her house, she found the demon having gone out, and her daughter laid upon the bed.
And again having departed from the borders of Tyre and Sidon, he came to the sea of Galilee in the midst of the regions of Decapolis.
And they bring a deaf, tongue-tied man to him, and they beseech him to lay his hand upon him.
And having taken him from the multitude in private, he put his fingers into his ears, and having spat, he touched his tongue.
And having looked up to heaven, he sighed, and says to him, Ephphatha, that is, Be opened.
And straightaway his ears were opened, and the bond of his tongue was loosened, and he spoke plainly.
And he commanded them that they should tell no man, but as much as he commanded them, so much the more abundantly they proclaimed it.
And they were exceedingly astonished, saying, He has done all things well. He even makes the deaf to hear, and the mute to speak.

In those days, the multitude being very great, and not having what they might eat, Jesus having summoned his disciples, he says to them,
I feel compassion toward the multitude, because they continue with me now three days, and do not have what they might eat.
And if I send them away without food to their house, they will faint on the way, for some of them come from afar.
And his disciples answered him, From where will anyone be able to fill these men of loaves here in a desolate place?
And he questioned them, How many loaves have ye? And they said, Seven.
And he commanded the crowd to sit down on the ground. And after taking the seven loaves, having given thanks, he broke in pieces, and gave to his disciples so that they might place before them. And they place before the crowd.
And they had a few small fishes. And having blessed them, he said to also place before them.
And they ate and were filled. And they took up seven hampers of surplus fragments.
And those who ate were about four thousand, and he sent them away.
And straightaway having entered into the boat with his disciples, he came into the parts of Dalmanutha.
And the Pharisees came forth, and began to dispute with him, seeking from him a sign from the sky, testing him.
And having sighed deeply in his spirit, he says, Why does this generation seek a sign? Truly I am telling you if a sign will be given to this generation.
And having left them, having entered again into a boat, he departed to the other side.
And they forgot to take loaves, and they did not have with them in the boat except one loaf.
And he commanded them, saying, Take heed, watch for the leaven of the Pharisees and the leaven of Herod.
And they deliberated among each other, saying, We have no loaves.
And knowing it Jesus says to them, Why do ye deliberate because ye have no loaves? Do ye not yet perceive nor understand? Have ye your heart still hardened?
Having eyes, ye see not, and having ears, ye hear not? And do ye not remember?
When I broke the five loaves for the five thousand, how many baskets full of fragments did ye take up? They say to him, Twelve.
And when the seven for the four thousand, how many hampers full of fragments did ye take up? And they said, Seven.
And he said to them, How do ye not understand?
And he comes to Bethsaida, and they bring a blind man to him, and call for him so that he might touch him.
And having taken the hand of the blind man, he led him outside of the village. And having spat on his eyes, having laid his hands upon him, he questioned him if he sees anything?
And having looked up, he said, The men that I see, I see as trees walking.
Then again he put his hands upon his eyes, and made him look up. And he was restored, and saw all men clearly.
And he sent him away to his house, saying, Thou may neither go into the village, nor may tell any man in the village.
And Jesus went forth, and his disciples, into the villages of Caesarea Philippi. And on the way he questioned his disciples, saying to them, Who do men say that I am?
And they answered, saying, John the immerser, and others, Elijah, but others, one of the prophets.
And he says to them, But who do ye say that I am? And having answered, Peter says to him, Thou are the Christ.
And he chided them that they should tell no man about him.
And he began to teach them that it was necessary for the Son of man to suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders, and the chief priests, and the scholars, and be killed, and after three days to rise.
And he spoke the matter openly. And having taken him aside, Peter began to rebuke him.
But he, having turned around, and having looked on his disciples, he rebuked Peter, saying, Go thee behind me, Satan, because thou think not the things of God, but the things of men.
And having called in the multitude with his disciples, he said to them, Whoever wants to follow behind me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever will lose his life because of me and the good news, this man will save it.
For what will it profit a man if he should gain the whole world, and forfeit his soul?
Or what will a man give in exchange for his soul?
For whoever may be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, the Son of man will also be ashamed of him when he comes in the glory of his Father with the holy agents.

And he said to them, Truly I say to you, there are some of those who have stood here, who will, no, not taste of death until they see the kingdom of God come in power.
And after six days Jesus takes Peter and James and John, and leads them up onto a high mountain alone, in private. And he was transfigured before them,
and his garments became glistening, exceedingly white, as snow, such as no fuller on earth is able to whiten.
And Elijah with Moses appeared to them, and they were talking with Jesus.
one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah.
For he knew not what he would say, for they were frightened.
And a cloud developed overshadowing them. And a voice came out of the cloud, This is my beloved Son. Hear ye him.
And suddenly having looked around, they saw no man anymore, but only Jesus with themselves.
And as they were coming down from the mountain, he commanded them that they should tell no man what they saw, except when the Son of man will rise from the dead.
And they kept the saying to themselves, discussing what is the rising from the dead.
And they questioned him, saying, The scholars say that Elijah must first come.
And having answered, he said to them, Elijah indeed comes first and restores all. And how it is written for the Son of man, that he would suffer many things and be rejected.
But I say to you, that Elijah has also come, and they did to him as much as they wanted, just as it is written for him.
And when they came to the disciples he saw a great multitude around them, and scholars disputing with them.
And straightaway all the multitude, having noticed him, were startled. And running near they greeted him.
And he questioned the scholars, What are ye disputing with them?
And having answered, one from the multitude said, Teacher, I brought my son to thee, who has a mute spirit.
And wherever it seizes him, it tears him, and he foams, and gnashes his teeth, and becomes limp. And I spoke to thy disciples that they might cast it out, and they were not able.
And having answered him, he says, O faithless generation, how long will I be with you? How long will I endure you? Bring him to me.
And they brought him to him. And when he saw him, straightaway the spirit convulsed him. And having fallen on the ground, he wallowed, foaming.
And he questioned his father, How much time is it since this has happened to him? And he said, From childhood.
And it often casts him both into the fire and into the waters so that it might destroy him. But if thou can do anything, help us, having compassion toward us.
And Jesus said to him, If thou are able to believe, all things are possible to him who believes.
And straightaway the father of the child having cried out, he said with tears, I believe. Lord, help thou my unbelief.
And when Jesus saw that a crowd was running together, he rebuked the unclean spirit, saying to it, Thou mute and deaf spirit, I command thee to come out of him, and enter into him no more.
And having cried out, and having convulsed him much, it came out. And he became as if dead, so as for many to say that he was dead.
But having taken him by the hand, Jesus lifted him up, and he arose.
And when he came into the house, his disciples questioned him privately, We were not able to cast it out.
And he said to them, This kind can come out by nothing, except by prayer and fasting.
And having departed from there, they passed through Galilee, and he did not want that any man would know it.
For he taught his disciples, and said to them, The Son of man is delivered up into the hands of men, and they will kill him. And after being killed, he will rise the third day.
But they did not understand the saying, and were afraid to question him.
And he came to Capernaum. And having become in the house he questioned them, What were ye deliberating among yourselves on the way?
But they were silent, for on the way they discussed among each other, who is greater.
And having sat down, he called the twelve, and he says to them, If any man wants to be first, he will be last of all, and helper of all.
And having taken a child, he set it in the midst of them. And after embracing it, he said to them,
Whoever may receive one of such children in my name, receives me, and whoever may receive me, does not receive me, but him who sent me.
And John answered him, saying, Teacher, we saw a certain man, who does not follow us, casting out demons in thy name, and we forbade him, because he does not follow us.
But Jesus said, Forbid him not, for there is no man who will do a mighty work in my name, and will be able quickly to speak evil of me.
For he who is not against you is for you.
For whoever may give you a cup of water to drink in my name, because ye are of Christ, truly I say to you, he will, no, not lose his reward.
And whoever may cause one of these little ones who believe in me to stumble, it is good for him instead, if a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were cast into the sea.
And if thy hand may cause thee to stumble, cut it off. It is good for thee to enter into life maimed, than having thy two hands to go into hell, into the unquenchable fire,
where their worm does not perish, and the fire is not quenched.
And if thy foot may cause thee to stumble, cut it off. It is good for thee to enter into life crippled, than having thy two feet to be cast into hell, into the unquenchable fire
where their worm does not perish, and the fire is not quenched.
And if thine eye may cause thee to stumble, pluck it out. It is good for thee to enter into the kingdom of God one-eyed, rather than having two eyes to be cast into the hell of fire,
where their worm does not perish, and the fire is not quenched.
For every man will be salted with fire, and every sacrifice will be salted with salt material.
The salt material is good, but if the salt material becomes saltless, by what will ye season it? Have salt in yourselves, and be at peace among each other.

And having risen from there, he comes into the borders of Judea through the other side of the Jordan. And multitudes come together to him again, and, as he has practiced, he taught them again.
And the Pharisees having approached, they demanded of him if it is permitted for a man to divorce a wife, testing him.
And having answered, he said to them, What did Moses command you?
And they said, Moses permitted to write a document of divorce, and to divorce her.
But having answered, Jesus said to them, For your hard heart he wrote for you this commandment.
But from the beginning of creation God made them male and female.
Because of this a man will leave his father and mother behind, and will be bonded with his wife,
and the two will be in one flesh. So then they are no more two, but one flesh.
What therefore God has joined together, no man shall separate.
And in the house the disciples questioned him again about the same thing.
And he says to them, Whoever may divorce his wife, and will marry another, commits adultery against her.
And if a woman should divorce her husband, and will be married to another, she commits adultery.
And they brought children to him, so that he would touch them. And the disciples rebuked those who were bringing them.
But when Jesus saw it, he was displeased, and said to them, Allow the children to come to me. Forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God.
Truly I say to you, whoever will not receive the kingdom of God as a child, he will, no, not enter it.
And having embraced them, while laying his hands upon them, he blessed them.
And as he was going forth on the way, one man having ran to him, and having knelt to him, questioned him, Good teacher, what should I do that I may inherit eternal life?
And Jesus said to him, Why do thou call me good? None is good except one, God.
Thou know the commandments. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not murder. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not testify falsely. Thou shall not defraud. Thou shall honor thy father and mother.
And having answered, he said to him, Teacher, all these things I have observed from my youth.
And having looked at him, Jesus loved him, and said to him, One thing thou lack. Go thou, sell as many things as thou have, and give to the poor, and thou will have treasure in heaven. And after taking up the cross, come, follow me.
But having become somber at the saying, he went away sorrowing, for he was a man who has many possessions.
And Jesus having looked around, he says to his disciples, How difficultly those who have riches will enter into the kingdom of God.
And the disciples were astonished at his words. But again having answered, Jesus says to them, Children, how difficult it is for those who trust in riches to enter into the kingdom of God.
It is easier for a camel to go through the hole of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
And they were exceedingly astonished, saying among themselves, Then who can be saved?
And having looked at them, Jesus says, With men, impossible, but not with God. For with God all things are possible.
Peter began to say to him, Lo, we have left all, and have followed thee.
And having answered, Jesus said, Truly I say to you, there is no man who has left house, or brothers, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, because of me, and because of the good news,
but he will receive a hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brothers, and sisters, and mothers, and children, and lands-with persecutions-and in the coming age, eternal life.
But many first will be last, and the last first.
And they were on the road going up to Jerusalem, and Jesus was going ahead of them. And they were amazed, and those who followed were afraid. And again having summoned the twelve, he began to tell them the things that were going to happen to him.
Behold, we go up to Jerusalem. And the Son of man will be delivered to the chief priests and the scholars. And they will condemn him to death, and will deliver him to the Gentiles.
And they will mock him, and will scourge, and will spit upon him, and will kill him. And the third day he will rise.
And James and John, the sons of Zebedee, come to him, saying, Teacher, we wish that thou would do for us whatever we ask.
And he said to them, What do ye want me to do for you?
And they said to him, Grant to us that we may sit, one at thy right hand, and one at thy left hand, in thy glory.
But Jesus said to them, Ye know not what ye are asking. Are ye able to drink the cup that I drink? And to be immersed the immersion that I am immersed?
And they said to him, We are able. And Jesus said to them, Ye will indeed drink the cup that I drink, and the immersion that I am immersed ye will be immersed.
But to sit at my right hand or at my left hand is not mine to give, but for whom it has been prepared.
And when the ten heard it they began to indignant about James and John.
And having summoned them, Jesus says to them, Ye know that those who presume to rule over the Gentiles, lord over them, and their great men have power over them.
But it is not so among you. Instead, whoever may want to become great among you, will be your helper,
and whoever of you may want to become first, will be a bondman of all.
For the Son of man also came not to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many.
And they come to Jericho. And as he went out from Jericho, and his disciples and a considerable crowd, Bartimaeus, the blind son of Timaeus, was sitting by the road begging.
And when he heard that it was Jesus the Nazarene, he began to cry out and say, Jesus, thou son of David, be merciful to me.
And many rebuked him, that he would be quiet, but he cried out much more, Thou son of David, be merciful to me.
And having stood still, Jesus said for him to be called. And they call the blind man, saying to him, Cheer up. Arise, he calls thee.
And he, having thrown off his garment, having risen, came to Jesus.
And having answered, Jesus says to him, What do thou want I would do to thee? And the blind man said to him, Rabboni, that I may receive my sight.
And Jesus said to him, Go thou, thy faith has healed thee. And straightaway he received his sight, and followed him on the way.

And when they came near to Jerusalem, to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount of Olives, he sends forth two of his disciples,
and says to them, Go ye into the village opposite you, and straightaway as ye enter into it, ye will find a colt tied, on which none of men have ever sat. After untying it, bring it.
And if any man should say to you, Why are ye doing this? say ye, The Lord has need of it, and straightaway he sends it here.
And they departed, and found the colt tied by the door outside in the street, and they untied it.
And some of those who stood there said to them, What are ye doing, untying the colt?
And they said to them just as Jesus commanded, and they allowed them.
And they brought the colt to Jesus, and threw their garments on it, and he sat upon it.
And many spread their garments upon the road, and others were cutting branches from the fields, and were spreading on the road.
And those who went in front, and those who came behind, cried out saying, Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!
Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that comes in the name of the Lord! Hosanna in the highest!
And Jesus entered into Jerusalem, and into the temple. And when he looked around on all things, the hour now being evening, he went out to Bethany with the twelve.
And on the morrow when they came out from Bethany he was hungry.
And having seen a fig tree afar off having leaves, he came, if perhaps he will find anything on it. And when he came to it he found nothing except leaves, for it was not the time of figs.
And having responded, Jesus said to it, No man may eat fruit from thee, no more into the age. And his disciples heard it.
And they come to Jerusalem. And having entered into the temple, Jesus began to drive out those who sold and bought in the temple. And he overturned the tables of the moneychangers, and the seats of those who sold the doves.
And he did not permit that any man might carry a container through the temple.
And he taught, saying to them, Is it not written, My house will be called a house of prayer for all the nations? But ye made it a den of robbers.
And the scholars and the chief priests heard it, and sought how they might destroy him, for they feared him, because all the people were awed at his doctrine.
And when it became evening he went forth outside of the city.
And passing by in the morning, they saw the fig tree dried out from the roots.
And having remembered, Peter says to him, Rabbi, behold, the fig tree that thou cursed has been dried out.
And having answered, Jesus says to them, Have faith in God.
For truly I say to you, that whoever may say to this mountain, Be thou taken up and cast into the sea, and will not doubt in his heart, but will believe that what he says comes to pass, whatever he may say will be for him.
Because of this I say to you, all things, as many as ye may ask, praying, believe that ye receive, and it will be for you.
And whenever ye may stand praying, forgive, if ye have anything against any man, so that also your Father in the heavens will forgive you your trespasses.
But if ye do not forgive, neither will your Father in the heavens forgive your trespasses.
And they come again to Jerusalem. And as he was walking in the temple, the chief priests, and the scholars, and the elders come to him.
And they say to him, By what authority are thou doing these things? Or who gave thee this authority so that thou may do these things?
And having answering, Jesus said to them, I also will question you one word, and answer me, and I will tell you by what authority I do these things.
The immersion of John, was it from heaven, or from men? Answer me.
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we should say, From heaven, he will say, Why then did ye not believe him?
But should we say, From men? (They feared the people, for all held John that he was indeed a prophet.)
And having answered, they say to Jesus, We do not know. And having answering, Jesus says to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.

And he began to speak to them in parables. A man planted a vineyard, and set up a hedge, and dug a wine vat, and built a tower, and leased it to farmers, and went on a journey.
And at the season he sent forth a bondman to the farmers, so that he might receive by the farmers from the fruit of the vineyard.
And having seized him, they beat him, and sent him away empty.
And again he sent another bondman to them. And that man, having stoned, they wounded in the head, and sent him away shamefully treated.
And again he sent another, and that man they killed, and many others, beating some, and killing some.
Therefore, still having his one beloved son, he also sent him to them, last, saying, They will be made ashamed by my son.
But those farmers said among themselves, This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, and the inheritance will be ours.
And having taken him, they killed him, and cast him outside of the vineyard.
What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do? He will come and destroy the farmers, and will give the vineyard to others.
The stone that those who build rejected, this came to be into the head of the corner.
This happened from the Lord, and it is marvelous in our eyes?
And they sought to seize him. And they feared the multitude, for they knew that he spoke the parable against them. And having left him, they went away.
And they send some of the Pharisees and of the Herodians to him, so that they might catch him in talk.
And when they came, they say to him, Teacher, we have seen that thou are true, and it is not a care to thee about any man, for thou look not to a personage of men, but teach the way of God in truth. Is it permitted to give tribute to Caesar or not?
Should we give, or should we not give? But Jesus, knowing their hypocrisy, said to them, Why do ye test me? Bring me a denarius, so that I may see it.
And they brought it. And he says to them, Whose is this image and inscription? And they said to him, Caesar's.
And having answered, Jesus said to them, Render the things of Caesar to Caesar, and the things of God to God. And they marveled at him.
And Sadducees come to him, who say there is no resurrection. And they questioned him, saying,
Teacher, Moses wrote to us, If a man's brother dies, and leaves behind a wife, and leaves no child, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed for his brother.
There were seven brothers. And the first took a wife, and dying left no seed.
And the second took her, and died, neither did he leave seed behind, and the third likewise.
And the seven took her, and left no seed. Last of all the woman also died.
In the resurrection when they rise, whose wife will she be of them? For the seven had her as wife.
not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God?
For when they rise from the dead, they neither marry, nor are given in marriage, but are as agents in the heavens.
But about the dead, that they rise, have ye not read in the book of Moses, how God spoke to him at the bush, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob?
He is not the God of the dead, but God of the living. Ye therefore are much misled.
And one of the scholars having come, having heard them disputing, knowing that he had answered them well, he questioned him, Which is the first commandment of all?
And Jesus answered him, The first of all the commandments is, Hear, thou Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord,
and thou shall love the Lord thy God from thy whole heart, and from thy whole soul, and from thy whole mind, and from thy whole strength. This is the first commandment.
And this second is similar, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself. There is no other commandment greater than these.
And the scholar said to him, Well, teacher. Thou spoke in truth that he is one, and there is no other but he.
And to love him from the whole heart, and from the whole understanding, and from the whole soul, and from the whole strength, and to love his neighbor as himself, is more than all whole burnt offerings and sacrifices.
And when Jesus saw him, that he answered wisely, he said to him, Thou are not far from the kingdom of God. And no man dared to question him any more.
And having responded as he taught in the temple, Jesus said, How do the scholars say that the Christ is the son of David?
For David himself said by the Holy Spirit, The Lord says to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand until I may place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet.
David himself therefore calls him Lord, and in what way is he his son? And the great multitude heard him gladly.
And in his teaching he said to them, Look away from the scholars, those who desire to go about in long robes, and salutations in the marketplaces,
and chief seats in the synagogues, and places of honor at the feasts,
those who devour widows' houses, and praying long in pretence. These will receive greater condemnation.
And having sat down opposite the treasury, Jesus watched how the multitude cast money into the treasury, and many rich men cast in much.
And one poor widow having come, she cast in two mites, which are a quadrans.
And having summoned his disciples, he says to them, Truly I say to you, that this poor widow cast in more than all those who are casting into the treasury.
For they all cast in from that which is abundant to them, but she from her need cast in all, as many things she had, her whole living.

And as he went forth out of the temple, one of his disciples says to him, Teacher, see what kind of stones and what kind of buildings.
And Jesus having answered, he said to him, See thou these great buildings? There will be left, no, not a stone upon a stone, that will, no, not be brought down.
And as he sat upon the mount of Olives opposite the temple, Peter and James and John and Andrew questioned him privately,
Tell us, when will these things be? And what is the sign when all these things are going to be fulfilled?
And having answered them, Jesus began to say to them, Watch that not any man lead you astray.
For many will come in my name, saying, I am, and they will lead many astray.
And when ye may hear of wars and rumors of wars, be not alarmed, for it must happen, but the end is not yet.
For nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom, and there will be earthquakes in various places, and there will be famines and troubles. These things are the beginnings of travails.
But watch ye yourselves, for they will deliver you up to councils, and ye will be beaten in synagogues. And ye will be stood before rulers and kings because of me, for a testimony to them.
And the good news must first be preached to all the nations.
But when they lead you, delivering you up, be not anxious before what ye might speak, nor meditate. But whatever may be given you in that hour, speak ye this, for ye are not who speak, but the Holy Spirit.
And brother will betray brother to death, and a father a child. And children will rise up against parents, and will condemn them to death.
And ye will be hated by all men because of my name, but he who endures to the end, this man will be saved.
But when ye see the abomination of desolation, which was spoken by Daniel the prophet, standing where it ought not (let him who reads understand), then let those in Judea flee to the mountains,
and let the man on the housetop not go down into the house, nor enter in to take anything out of his house,
and let the man who is in the field not turn back for the things behind, to take his cloak.
But woe to those who have in the womb, and to those who suckle in those days.
And pray ye that your flight may not be in winter.
For those days will be tribulation, such as has not happened from the beginning of the creation that God created until now, and no, will not happen.
And unless the Lord cut short the days, no flesh would have been saved, but because of the chosen, whom he chose, he cut short the days.
And then if any man should say to you, Lo, here is the Christ, or, Lo, there, do not believe.
For false Christs and false prophets will arise, and will give signs and wonders, in order to lead astray, if possible, even the chosen.
But watch ye. Behold, I have foretold all to you.
But in those days, after that tribulation, the sun will be darkened, and the moon will not give its light,
and the stars of the sky will be falling, and the powers that are in the heavens will be shaken.
And then they will see the Son of man coming in clouds with much power and glory.
And then he will send forth his agents, and will gather together his chosen from the four winds, from the outermost part of the earth as far as the outermost part of heaven.
But learn a parable from the fig tree. When its branch now becomes tender, and sprouts the leaves, ye know that summer is near.
So ye also, when ye may see these things happening, know ye that it is near, at the doors.
Truly I say to you, that this generation will, no, not pass away, until all these things happen.
The sky and the earth will pass away, but my words may, no, not pass away.
But about that day or that hour no man knows, not even the agents in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father.
Watch ye! Be alert and pray, for ye know not when the time is,
like a man abroad, having left his house, and having given authority to his bondmen, and to each man his work, and commanded the doorkeeper that he should watch.
Watch therefore, for ye know not when the lord of the house comes, at evening, or at midnight, or at cock crowing, or in the morning,
lest having come suddenly, he may find you sleeping.
And what I say to you I say to all, watch!

Now after two days was the Passover and the unleavened bread. And the chief priests and the scholars sought how, having take him with trickery, they might kill him,
but they said, Not during the feast, lest there will be an uproar of the people.
And while he was in Bethany in the house of Simon the leper, as he sat relaxing, a woman came having an alabaster cruse of ointment of pure spikenard, very valuable. And having broken the alabaster cruse, she poured it on his head.
And some were indignant within themselves, saying, Why has this waste of the ointment happened?
For this could have been sold for over three hundred denarii, and given to the poor. And they grumbled at her.
But Jesus said, Leave her be. Why do ye cause troubles for her? She performed a good work on me.
For ye always have the poor with you, and whenever ye may desire ye can do them well, but ye do not always have me.
She applied what she had to anoint my body. She did it beforehand for the burial.
And truly I say to you, wherever this good news may be preached in the whole world, also what she did will be told for a memorial of her.
And Judas Iscariot, one of the twelve, went away to the chief priests, so that he might betray him to them.
And when they heard it, they were glad, and promised to give him silver. And he sought how he might betray him conveniently.
And on the first day of unleavened bread, when they killed the Passover, his disciples say to him, Where do thou want, after going, we should prepare that thou may eat the Passover?
And he sends forth two of his disciples, and says to them, Go into the city, and a man carrying a pitcher of water will meet you. Follow him.
And wherever he may enter, say ye to the house-ruler, The teacher says, Where is the guest room, where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?
And he himself will show you a large upper room spread out ready. Prepare ye for us there.
And his disciples went forth, and came into the city, and found just as he had said to them. And they prepared the Passover.
And having become evening he comes with the twelve.
And as they were relaxing and eating, Jesus said, Truly I say to you, that one of you eating with me will betray me.
They began to be sorrowful, and to say to him one by one, Not I? and another, Not I?
And having answered, he said to them, It is one of the twelve dipping with me in the dish.
The Son of man indeed goes as it is written about him, but woe to that man through whom the Son of man is betrayed! It was good for him if that man was not born.
And as they were eating, Jesus having taken bread, having blessed, he broke in pieces, and gave to them, and said, Take, eat, this is my body.
And after taking the cup, having expressed thanks, he gave to them, and they all drank from it.
And he said to them, This is my blood of the new covenant, which is poured out for many.
Truly I say to you, that I will no more drink of the fruit of the grapevine, until that day when I drink it anew in the kingdom of God.
And when they sang a hymn, they went out onto the mount of Olives.
And Jesus says to them, All ye will be caused to stumble by me this night, because it is written, I will strike the shepherd, and the sheep will be scattered.
But after I am raised up, I will go before you into Galilee.
But Peter said to him, Even if all will be caused to stumble, yet not I.
And Jesus says to him, Truly I say to thee, that thou today, in this night, before a cock sounds twice, will deny me thrice.
But he spoke more extreme, If I must die with thee, I will, no, not deny thee. And they all spoke the same way also.
And they come to a place the name of which was Gethsemane. And he says to his disciples, Sit ye here until I pray.
And he takes Peter and James and John with him, and began to be greatly disturbed, and very distressed.
And he says to them, My soul is deeply grieved, to the point of death. Remain ye here, and watch.
And having gone forward a little, he fell on the ground, and prayed that, if it were possible, the hour might pass from him.
And he said, Abba, Father, all things are possible to thee. Remove this cup from me, but not what I want, but what thou want.
And he comes and finds them sleeping. And he says to Peter, Simon, Do thou sleep? Could thou not watch one hour?
Watch ye and pray that ye may not enter into temptation. Truly, the spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak.
And again having departed, he prayed, having said the same statement.
And having returned, he found them again sleeping, for their eyes were weighed down, and they knew not what they should reply to him.
And he comes the third time, and says to them, Sleep the remaining, and take your rest. It is enough. The hour has come. Behold, the Son of man is betrayed into the hands of sinners.
Arise, let us be going. Behold, he who betrays me has come near.
And straightaway, while he still spoke, Judas, being one of the twelve, comes, and with him a great multitude with swords and clubs from the chief priests, and the scholars, and the elders.
Now he who betrayed him had given them a sign, saying, Whomever I may kiss is he. Seize him, and lead away securely.
And when he came, straightaway having approached him, he says, Rabbi, Rabbi, and kissed him much.
And they threw their hands on him, and seized him.
And a certain one of those who stood by, having drawn his sword, struck the bondman of the high priest, and cut off his ear.
And having answered, Jesus said to them, Have ye come out as against a robber with swords and clubs to arrest me?
I was daily near you, teaching in the temple, and ye did not seize me-but that the scriptures might be fulfilled.
And having forsook him, they all fled.
And a certain one young man followed with him, having been wrapped naked in a linen cloth. And the young men seized him,
but having left behind the linen cloth, he fled from them naked.
And they led Jesus away to the high priest. And all the chief priests and the elders and the scholars assemble with him.
And Peter followed him from a distance, as far as inside the courtyard of the high priest, and was sitting with the subordinates, and warming himself near the light.
Now the chief priests and the whole council sought testimony against Jesus in order to put him to death, and did not find it.
For many testified falsely against him, and their testimonies were not consistent.
And some men having stood up, testified falsely against him, saying,
We heard him saying, I will destroy this temple made with hands, and by three days I will build another not made with hands.
And not even this way was their testimony consistent.
And the high priest having stood up in the midst, he demanded Jesus, saying, Thou answer nothing? What is it these men testify against thee?
But he remained silent, and answered nothing. Again the high priest demanded him, and says to him, Are thou the Christ, the Son of the Blessed?
And Jesus said, I am. And ye will see the Son of man sitting at the right hand of Power, and coming with the clouds of the sky.
And the high priest having torn his clothes, he says, What further need have we of witnesses?
Ye have heard the blasphemy. What does it seem to you? And they all condemned him to be deserving of death.
And some began to spit on him, and to cover his face, and to strike him with a fist, and to say to him, Prophesy. And the subordinates were throwing him with slaps.
And as Peter was below in the courtyard, one of the servant girls of the high priest comes.
And having seen Peter warming himself, having looked at him, she says, Thou also were with Jesus of Nazareth.
But he denied, saying, I know not, nor understand what thou say. And he went outside onto the porch, and a cock sounded.
And the servant girl having seen him, she began again to say to those who stood by, This man is from them.
But he again denied it. And after a little while again those who stood by said to Peter, Surely thou are from them, for thou are a Galilean, and thy accent is similar.
But he began to curse and to swear, I do not know this man of whom ye speak.
And the second time a cock sounded. And Peter remembered the saying that Jesus said to him, Before a cock sounds twice, thou will deny me thrice. And having broke down, he wept.

And straightaway in the morning the chief priests with the elders and scholars and the whole council, having made a plan, after binding Jesus, they took him away, and delivered him up to Pilate.
And Pilate questioned him, Are thou the king of the Jews? And having answered, he said to him, Thou say.
And the chief priests accused him of many things.
And Pilate again questioned him, saying, Thou answer nothing? Behold how many things they testify against thee.
But Jesus answered nothing any more, so as for Pilate to wonder.
Now during a feast he released to them one prisoner, whomever they requested.
And a man who was called Barabbas was with the rebels who were bound, men who had committed murder during the insurrection.
And having cried aloud, the multitude began to ask as he was always doing for them.
And Pilate answered them, saying, Do ye wish that I would release to you the king of the Jews?
For he knew that the chief priests had delivered him up because of envy.
But the chief priests incited the crowd, so that he would release Barabbas to them instead.
And again having answered, Pilate said to them, What then do ye wish I would do to the man whom ye call the king of the Jews?
And they cried out again, Crucify him.
And Pilate said to them, For what evil has he done? But they cried out even more, Crucify him.
And Pilate, wanting to do what was sufficient for the crowd, released Barabbas to them. And he delivered Jesus, after scourging, so that he might be crucified.
And the soldiers led him away inside the courtyard, which is the Praetorium, and they call together the whole band.
And they put purple clothing on him, and clothe him with a woven crown of thorns,
and began to salute him, Hail, king of the Jews!
And they struck his head with a reed, and spat upon him, and bowing their knees worshiped him.
And when they had mocked him, they took the purple garment off of him, and dressed him with his own garments. And they lead him out so that they might crucify him.
And they draft a certain Simon, a Cyrenian passing by coming from the countryside, the father of Alexander and Rufus, so that he would take his cross.
And they bring him to the place Golgotha, which is, being interpreted, the place of a skull.
And they gave him wine mingled with myrrh to drink, but he did not take it.
And having crucified him, they divided his garments, casting a lot for them, who would take what.
And it was the third hour, and they crucified him.
And the inscription of his accusation was inscribed, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
And they crucify two robbers with him, one at his right hand, and one at his left.
And the scripture was fulfilled, which says, And he was reckoned with lawless men.
And those who passed by railed at him, wagging their heads, and saying, Ha! Thou who destroy the temple, and build it in three days,
save thyself, and come down from the cross.
Likewise also the chief priests mocking among each other with the scholars said, He saved others, he cannot save himself.
Let the Christ, the king of Israel, come down now from the cross, that we may see and believe in him. And those who were crucified with him reviled him.
And having become the sixth hour, darkness occurred over the whole land until the ninth hour.
And at the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a great voice, saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? which is, being interpreted, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
And some of those who stood by, when they heard it, said, Behold, he calls Elijah.
And one having ran, and having filled a sponge of vinegar, and having placed it on a reed, gave him to drink, saying, Leave be. We might see if Elijah comes to take him down.
And having given out a great voice, Jesus expired.
And the curtain of the temple was torn in two from the top to the bottom.
And when the centurion, who stood from opposite him, saw that he expired, having cried out this way, he said, Truly this man was the Son of God.
And there were also women looking on from a distance, among whom were also Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James the small man, and of Joses, and Salome;
women who also followed him and served him when he was in Galilee, also many other women who came up with him to Jerusalem.
And now having become evening, since it was the Preparation, that is, pre-sabbath,
Joseph of Arimathaea came, an honorable councilman who also himself was awaiting the kingdom of God, emboldened, he went in near Pilate, and requested the body of Jesus.
And Pilate wondered if he died already. And having summoned the centurion, he questioned him if he was already dead.
And having ascertained from the centurion, he granted the body to Joseph.
And having bought fine linen, and having taken him down, he wrapped him in the linen, and laid him in a sepulcher, being that which had been hewn out of rock. And he rolled a stone to the door of the sepulcher.
And Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses saw where he was laid.

And when the sabbath was past, Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of James, and Salome, bought spices, so that having come, they might anoint him.
And very much early morning on the first day of the week, they come near to the sepulcher when the sun was risen.
And they said to themselves, Who will roll away the stone for us from the door of the sepulcher?
And having looked, they see that the stone has been rolled back, for it was very large.
And having entered into the sepulcher, they saw a young man sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe, and they were alarmed.
And he says to them, Be not alarmed. Ye seek Jesus, the man of Nazareth who was crucified. He was raised. He is not here. Behold, the place where they laid him.
But go, tell his disciples and Peter, that he goes before you into Galilee. Ye will see him there, just as he said to you.
And having come out, they fled from the sepulcher, and trembling and astonishment seized them. And they said nothing to any man, for they were afraid.
Now having risen early morning on the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary Magdalene, from whom he had cast out seven demons.
That woman, having gone, informed those who became with him, as they mourned and wept.
And those men, when they heard that he is alive, and was seen by her, did not believe.
And after these things he appeared in a different form to two of them as they walked going into the countryside.
And those men having departed, they reported to the others. Neither did they believe those men.
Afterward he became visible to them, to the eleven, who were relaxing. And he upbraided their unbelief and hard heart, because they did not believe those who saw him after he was raised.
And he said to them, Having gone into all the world, preach ye the good news to the whole creation.
He who believes and is immersed will be saved, but he who does not believe will be damned.
In my name they will cast out demons. They will speak in new tongues.
They will take up serpents, and if they drink anything deadly, it will, no, not harm them. They will lay hands on the feeble, and they will fare well.
Therefore indeed, the Lord, after he spoke to them, was taken up into heaven, and sat down at the right hand of God.
And those men, having gone forth, they preached everywhere, the Lord working jointly, and confirming the word by the signs that followed. Truly.

Luke

Inasmuch as many have taken in hand to arrange in order a narration about the deeds that have been brought to fullness among us,
just as they delivered them to us, who became from the beginning eyewitnesses and servants of the word,
it occurred to me also, having followed closely from the beginning all things accurately, to write to thee in order, eminent Theophilus,
so that thou might know the certainty of the declarations about which thou were instructed.
It came to pass in the days of Herod, king of Judea, there was a certain priest, named Zacharias, from the division of Abijah, and his wife was from the daughters of Aaron, and her name was Elizabeth.
And they were both righteous before God, going in all the commandments and righteous things of the Lord blameless.
And there was no child to them because Elizabeth was barren, and they were both advanced in their days.
But it came to pass during his service as a priest in the course of his division in the presence of God,
that, according to the custom of the priesthood, he was chosen by lot to burn incense after entering into the temple of the Lord.
And the whole multitude of the people were praying outside at the hour of incense.
And an agent of the Lord became visible to him, standing on the right side of the altar of incense.
And Zacharias having seen, was shaken, and fear fell upon him.
But the agent said to him, Fear not, Zacharias, because thy plea was heard, and thy wife Elizabeth will bear a son for thee. And thou shall call his name John.
And there will be joy and exultation for thee, and many will rejoice at his birth.
For he will be great in the sight of the Lord, and he should, no, not drink wine and strong drink. And he will be filled of the Holy Spirit, even from his mother's belly.
And he will turn back many of the sons of Israel to the Lord their God.
And he will go ahead, in front of him, in the spirit and power of Elijah, to turn back the hearts of fathers toward children, and the disobedient in a mentality of the righteous, to make ready for the Lord a people prepared.
And Zacharias said to the agent, How will I know this? For I am aged, and my wife is advanced in her days.
And having answered, the agent said to him, I am Gabriel who stand in the presence of God. And I was sent to speak to thee, and to announce these good news to thee.
And behold, thou will be mute, and not able to speak until that day these things will come to pass, because thou did not believe my words, which will be fulfilled in their time.
And the people were waiting for Zacharias, and they wondered during his delay in the temple.
And when he came out, he could not speak to them, and they recognized that he had seen a vision in the temple. And he was beckoning to them, and remained speechless.
And it came to pass, when the days of his service were fulfilled, he departed to his house.
And after these days his wife Elizabeth conceived, and she concealed herself five months, saying,
Thus the Lord has done to me during the days in which he looked, to take away my shame among men.
Now in the sixth month the agent Gabriel was sent by God to a city of Galilee, named Nazareth,
to a virgin betrothed to a man whose name was Joseph, of the house of David. And the virgin's name was Mary.
And the agent having come in near her, he said, Hail, thou who are highly favored. The Lord is with thee, thou who are blessed among women.
But having seen, she was perplexed at his saying, and was pondering what kind of greeting this might be.
And the agent said to her, Fear not, Mary, for thou have found favor with God.
And behold, thou will conceive in thy womb, and bring forth a son. And thou shall call his name JESUS.
This man will be great, and will be called the Son of the Most High. And the Lord God will give to him the throne of his father David.
And he will reign over the house of Jacob into the ages. And of his kingdom there will be no end.
And Mary said to the agent, How will this be, since I know not a man?
And having answered, the agent said to her, The Holy Spirit will come upon thee, and the power of the Most High will overshadow thee. Therefore also the holy thing that is begotten will be called the Son of God.
And behold, Elizabeth thy kinswoman, she also has conceived a son in her old age, and this is the sixth month with her who was called barren.
For no word from God will be impossible.
And Mary said, Behold the maid-servant of the Lord. May it happen to me according to thy word. And the agent departed from her.
And having risen in these days, Mary went with haste into the hill country, into a city of Judah,
and entered into the house of Zacharias and greeted Elizabeth.
And it came to pass, when Elizabeth heard the greeting of Mary, the babe leaped in her belly. And Elizabeth was filled of the Holy Spirit,
and she exclaimed in a great voice, and said, Blessed are thou among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy belly.
And why is this to me, that the mother of my Lord would come to me?
For lo, when the voice of thy greeting happened in my ears, the babe leaped with joy in my belly.
And blessed is she who believed, because there will be a fulfillment of the things that were spoken to her from the Lord.
And Mary said, My soul magnifies the Lord,
and my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
because he has looked upon the lowliness of his bondmaid. For behold, from henceforth all generations will regard me blessed,
because the Mighty has done great things to me. And his name is holy.
And his mercy is for generations of generations to those who fear him.
He did a mighty work by his arm. He scattered the proud in the mentality of their heart.
He brought down potentates from thrones, and raised up lowly men.
He filled those who are hungry with good things, and those who are rich he sent away empty.
He helped his boy Israel to be reminded of mercy,
to Abraham and his seed into the age.
And Mary dwelt with her about three months, and returned to her house.
Now the time for Elizabeth was fulfilled for her to give birth, and she brought forth a son.
And her neighbors and her kinfolk heard that the Lord magnified his mercy toward her, and they rejoiced with her.
And it came to pass on the eighth day, that they came to circumcise the child, and they were calling it by the name of his father Zacharias.
And his mother having answered, said, No, but he will be called John.
And they said to her, There is no man among thy relatives who is called by this name.
And they made signs to his father, whatever he wanted to call him.
And having asked for a writing tablet, he wrote, saying, His name is John. And they all marveled.
And immediately his mouth was opened, and his tongue, and he spoke, praising God.
And fear developed in all who dwell around them. And all these sayings were talked about in the entire hill country of Judea.
And all who heard stored up in their heart, saying, What then will this child be? For the hand of the Lord was with him.
And his father Zacharias was filled of the Holy Spirit, and prophesied, saying,
Blessed is the Lord, the God of Israel, because he came to help, and made ransom for his people.
And he raised up a horn of salvation for us in the house of his boy David,
just as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets from of old,
salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all who hate us,
to do mercy with our fathers, and his holy covenant to be remembered,
the oath that he swore to Abraham our father, to give to us,
without fear from the hand of our enemies, having been saved to serve him
in piety and righteousness before him all the days of our life.
And thou, child, will be called a prophet of the Most High. For thou will go ahead, before the face of the Lord, to prepare his ways,
to give knowledge of salvation to his people in the remission of their sins,
because of the bowels of mercy of our God, by which the dayspring from on high came to help us,
to give light to those who dwell in darkness and the shadow of death, to guide our feet into a way of peace.
And the child grew, and became strong in spirit. And he was in the desolate regions until the day of his manifestation to Israel.

Now it came to pass in those days, a decree went out from Caesar Augustus to enroll all the world.
This enrollment first occurred when Quirinius was governor of Syria.
And all went to be enrolled, each into his personal city.
And Joseph also went up from Galilee, out of the city of Nazareth, into Judea to the city of David, which is called Bethlehem, because he was of the house and patriarchy of David,
to enroll himself with Mary, the woman who was betrothed to him, being pregnant.
And it came to pass while they were there, the days were fulfilled for her to bring forth.
And she brought forth her son, the firstborn, and wrapped him in swaddling clothes, and laid him in the feed trough, because there was no place for them in the inn.
And there were shepherds in the same region living in the fields, and keeping watch by night over their flock.
And behold, an agent of the Lord stood near them, and the glory of the Lord shone around them. And they feared a great fear.
And the agent said to them, Fear not, for behold, I bring you good news of great joy that will be to all the people,
because to you was born today in the city of David a Savior, who is Christ Lord.
Ye will find a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, and lying in a feed trough.
And suddenly there came to be with the agent a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying,
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, goodwill among men.
And it came to pass, as the agents went away from them into heaven, that the men (the shepherds) said to each other, Let us indeed go through as far as Bethlehem, and see this declaration that has come to pass, which the Lord made known to us.
And having hastened, they came and found both Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in the feed trough.
And when they saw it, they informed about the declaration that was told them about this child.
And all who heard it wondered about the things that were spoken to them by the shepherds.
But Mary kept all these proclamations, pondering in her heart.
And the shepherds returned, glorifying and praising God for all that they heard and saw, as it was told to them.
And when eight days were fulfilled to circumcise him, that his name was called JESUS, the one called by the agent before he was conceived in the belly.
And when the days of their purification according to the law of Moses were fulfilled, they brought him up to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord,
(just as it is written in a law of the Lord that every male that opens a womb will be called holy to the Lord),
and to offer a sacrifice according to that which is said in a law of the Lord, a pair of turtledoves, or two young pigeons.
And behold, there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon. And this man was righteous and devout, waiting for the encouragement of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
And it was divinely revealed to him by the Holy Spirit, that he would not see death before he would see the Christ of the Lord.
And he came by the Spirit into the temple. And when the parents brought in the child Jesus, for them to do according to the custom of the law about him,
he also received it into his arms, and praised God, and said,
Now dismiss thy bondman in peace, Master, according to thy word,
because my eyes have seen thy salvation,
a light for enlightenment of Gentiles, and glory of thy people Israel.
And Joseph and his mother were marveling at the things being spoken about him.
And Simeon blessed them, and said to Mary his mother, Behold, this man is set for the falling and the rising of many in Israel, and for a sign being repudiated
(and also of thee, a sword will pierce through thine own soul), so that thoughts out of many hearts may be revealed.
And there was Anna, a prophetess, a daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher (being advanced in many days, having lived with a husband seven years from her virginity,
and this woman was a widow to eighty-four years), who did not depart from the temple, serving with fastings and supplications night and day.
And having stood near at that same hour, she acknowledged the Lord, and spoke about him to all those who were awaiting redemption in Jerusalem.
And when they completed all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galilee to their own city Nazareth.
And the child grew, and became strong in spirit, filled with wisdom. And the grace of God was upon it.
And his parents went to Jerusalem every year at the feast of the Passover.
And when he became twelve years old, them having gone up according to the custom of the feast,
and having fulfilled the days, during their return the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem. And Joseph and his mother did not know it,
but, having supposed him to be in the caravan, they went a day's journey. And they sought him among their kinfolk and acquaintances.
And not having found him, they turned back to Jerusalem, seeking him.
And it came to pass after three days they found him in the temple, sitting in the midst of the teachers, both hearing them, and questioning them.
And all who heard him were astonished at his understanding and answers.
And when they saw him they were amazed. And his mother said to him, Child, why did thou this way to us? Behold, thy father and I were seeking thee sorrowing.
And he said to them, Why is it that ye were seeking me? Had ye not known that I must be among the things of my Father?
And they did not understand the saying that he spoke to them.
And he went down with them, and came to Nazareth, and was being subordinate to them. And his mother kept all these sayings in her heart.
And Jesus increased in wisdom and in stature, and in favor with God and men.

Now in the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar, Pontius Pilate being governor of Judea, and Herod being tetrarch of Galilee, and his brother Philip being tetrarch of the region belonging to Ituraea, and of the region of Trachonitis, and Lysanias being tetrarch of Abilene,
in the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas, the word of God came to be in John the son of Zacharias in the wilderness.
And he came into all the region around the Jordan, preaching an immersion of repentance for remission of sins,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord. Make his paths straight.
Every valley will be filled, and every mountain and hill will be brought low. And the crooked things will be into straight and the rough into smooth ways.
And all flesh will see the salvation of God.
He said therefore to the multitudes who went out to be immersed by him, Ye offspring of vipers, who showed you to flee from the coming wrath?
Bring forth therefore fruits worthy of repentance, and do not begin to say within yourselves, We have a father, Abraham. For I say to you, that God is able from these stones to raise up children to Abraham.
And even now the axe is laid at the root of the trees. Every tree therefore not making good fruit is cut down, and cast into fire.
And the crowds questioned him, saying, What then shall we do?
And having answered, he says to them, He who has two coats, let him share with him not having, and he who has food, let him do likewise.
And tax collectors also came to be immersed, and they said to him, Teacher, what should we do?
And he said to them, Collect not one thing more than from what has been appointed for you.
And men who were soldiers also questioned him, saying, And we, what should we do? And he said to them, Do violence to no man, nor accuse falsely, and be content with your wages.
And as the people were expectant, and all pondering in their hearts about John, if perhaps he was the Christ,
John responded, saying to them all, I indeed immerse you in water, but a man mightier than I comes, of whom I am not worthy to unloose the strap of his shoes. He will immerse you in the Holy Spirit and fire,
whose winnowing fork is in his hand, and he will thoroughly cleanse his threshing floor, and will gather the wheat into his storehouse, but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.
Indeed therefore, also exhorting the people with many other things, he preached the good news.
But Herod the tetrarch, being reproved by him about Herodias his brother's wife, and about all of which evil things Herod had done,
also added this to them all, he even locked up John in prison.
Now it came to pass, during the immersion of all the people, Jesus also having been immersed and praying, for the heaven to be opened,
and the Holy Spirit to descend in a bodily form as a dove upon him, and a voice to occur out of heaven, saying, Thou are my beloved Son. In thee I am well pleased.
And Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old, being the son (as was supposed) of Joseph, the son of Heli,
the son of Matthat, the son of Levi, the son of Melchi, the son of Janna, the son of Joseph,
the son of Mattathias, the son of Amos, the son of Nahum, the son of Esli, the son of Naggai,
the son of Maath, the son of Mattathias, the son of Semein, the son of Joseph, the son of Joda,
the son of Joannan, the son of Rhesa, the son of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the son of Neri,
the son of Melchi, the son of Addi, the son of Cosam, the son of Elmadam, the son of Er,
the son of Jose, the son of Eliezer, the son of Jorim, the son of Matthat, the son of Levi,
the son of Simeon, the son of Judah, the son of Joseph, the son of Jonam, the son of Eliakim,
the son of Melea, the son of Menna, the son of Mattatha, the son of Nathan, the son of David,
the son of Jesse, the son of Obed, the son of Boaz, the son of Salmon, the son of Nahshon,
the son of Amminadab, the son of Ram, the son of Hezron, the son of Perez, the son of Judah,
the son of Jacob, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham, the son of Terah, the son of Nahor,
the son of Serug, the son of Reu, the son of Peleg, the son of Heber, the son of Shelah
the son of Cainan, the son of Arphaxad, the son of Shem, the son of Noah, the son of Lamech,
the son of Methuselah, the son of Enoch, the son of Jared, the son of Mahalaleel, the son of Cainan,
the son of Enos, the son of Seth, the son of Adam, the son of God.

And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan, and was led by the Spirit into the wilderness,
being tempted forty days by the devil. And he ate nothing in those days, and when they were ended, afterward he was hungry.
And the devil said to him, If thou are the Son of God, speak to this stone that it may become bread.
And Jesus answered, saying to him, It is written, Man will not live on bread alone, but on every saying of God.
And having brought him onto a high mountain, the devil showed him all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.
And the devil said to him, I will give to thee all this authority, and the glory of them, because it has been delivered to me, and to whomever I want I give it.
If therefore thou will worship before me, it will all be thine.
And having answered, Jesus said to him, Go thee behind me, Satan. It is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
And he brought him to Jerusalem, and set him on the pinnacle of the temple, and he said to him, If thou are the Son of God, cast thyself down from here,
for it is written, He will give his agents orders about thee, to protect thee,
and, They will take thee up on their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone.
And having answered, Jesus said to him, It is said, Thou shall not challenge the Lord thy God.
And when the devil ended every temptation, he withdrew from him until a time.
And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee. And a report went out about him through the entire region around.
And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified by all.
And he came to Nazareth, where he was brought up. And according to that which was customary to him, he entered into the synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up to read.
And the book of the prophet Isaiah was given to him. And having opened the book, he found the place where it was written,
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he anointed me to preach good news to the poor. He has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to proclaim deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to sent forth in deliverance those who have been broken,
to proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.
And having closed the book, having given it back to the attendant, he sat down. And the eyes of all in the synagogue were focused on him.
And he began to say to them, Today this scripture has been fulfilled in your ears.
And all witnessed to him, and wondered at the words of grace that proceeded out of his mouth. And they said, Is this not the son of Joseph?
Physician, heal thyself. How many things we heard that happened at Capernaum, do also here in thy fatherland.
And he said, Truly I say to you, that not one prophet is acceptable in his fatherland.
But in truth I say to you, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elijah, when the sky was shut up for three years and six months, when a great famine occurred on all the land.
And Elijah was sent to none of them, except to Zarephath, to a widow woman of Sidon.
And many lepers were in Israel near Elisha the prophet, and none of them was cleansed, except Naaman the Syrian.
And all in the synagogue were filled with rage, having heard these things.
And having risen up, they thrust him outside of the city, and brought him as far as the brow of the hill on which their city had been built, in order to throw him down headlong.
But he, having passed through the midst of them, departed.
And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. And he was teaching them on the sabbath day,
and they were astonished at his teaching, for his word was with authority.
And in the synagogue there was a man who had a spirit of an unclean deity. And it cried out in a great voice, saying,
Oh no! What is with us and with thee, Jesus of Nazareth? Did thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou are, the Holy man of God.
And Jesus rebuked it, saying, Be thou muzzled, and come out of him. And the demon having thrown him down in the midst, it came out of him, not having harm him.
And amazement developed in all, and they spoke among each other, saying, What is this word? Because with authority and power he commands the unclean spirits, and they come out.
And a report about him went forth into every place of the region around.
And having arisen from the synagogue, he entered into the house of Simon. And Simon's mother-in-law was gripped by a great fever, and they besought him about her.
And having stood over her, he rebuked the fever. And it left her, and immediately after rising up, she served them.
And when the sun was setting, all, as many as had those who were incapacitated with various diseases, brought them to him. And having laid his hands on each one of them, he healed them.
And also demons came out from many, crying out, and saying, Thou are the Christ, the Son of God. And rebuking them, he did not allow them to speak, because they knew him to be the Christ.
And when it became day, having departed, he went to a desolate place. And the multitudes sought him, and they came to him, and were restraining him not depart from them.
But he said to them, I must preach the good news of the kingdom of God to the other cities also, because I was sent for this.
And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.

Now it came to pass, while the multitude pressed upon him to hear the word of God, and having stood still, he was beside the lake of Gennesaret.
And he saw two boats standing by the lake, but the fishermen having gone out of them, were washing their nets.
And having entered into one of the boats, which was Simon's, he asked him to put out a little from the land. And having sat down, he taught the crowds from the boat.
And when he stopped speaking, he said to Simon, Put out into the depth, and let down your nets for a catch.
And having answered, Simon said to him, Master, having toiled through the whole night, we took nothing, but at thy saying, I will let down the net.
And having done this, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes, and their net was tearing.
And they beckoned to their partners in the other boat, after coming, to assist them. And they came and filled both the boats, so as for them to be sunk down.
But Simon Peter having seen, he fell down at Jesus' knees, saying, Depart from me, because I am a sinful man, Lord.
For astonishment surrounded him, and all those with him, at the catch of the fishes that they caught,
and likewise also James and John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And Jesus said to Simon, Fear not, from henceforth thou will be catching men.
And when they brought their boats to land, after forsaking all, they followed him.
And it came to pass while he was in one of the cities, behold, a man full of leprosy. And having seen Jesus, having fallen on his face, he besought him, saying, Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.
And having stretched forth his hand, he touched him, having said, I will, be thou clean. And straightaway the leprosy departed from him.
And he commanded him to tell no man, but, After going, show thyself to the priest, and bring concerning thy cleansing, just as Moses commanded for a testimony to them.
But the report about him went through more, and many multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed by him from their infirmities.
But he himself was withdrawing into the desolate regions, and praying.
And it came to pass during one of those days, he was also teaching. And there were seated Pharisees and law teachers, who were men having come out of every town of Galilee and Judea and Jerusalem. And the power of the Lord was to heal them.
And behold, men bringing a man on a bed who was paralyzed. And they sought to bring him in, and to lay him before him.
And not having found how they might bring him in because of the multitude, after going up upon the housetop, they let him down through the tiles with the small bed into the midst in front of Jesus.
And having seen their faith, he said to him, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee.
And the scholars and the Pharisees began to deliberate, saying, Who is this who speaks blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, except God alone?
But when Jesus perceived their thoughts, having responded, he said to them, Why do ye deliberate in your hearts?
Which is easier, to say, Thy sins are forgiven thee, or to say, Arise and walk?
But that ye may know that the Son of man has authority upon earth to forgive sins (he said to the paralyzed man), I say to thee, Arise, and after taking up thy small bed, go to thy house.
And immediately having risen up before them, after taking up that on which he lay, he departed to his house glorifying God.
And amazement gripped all, and they glorified God. And they were filled with fear, saying, We have seen strange things today.
And after these things he went forth and saw a tax collector, named Levi, sitting at the tax office. And he said to him, Follow me.
And after leaving behind all, having risen up, he followed him.
And Levi made a great feast for him in his house, and there was a large crowd of tax collectors and others who were relaxing with them.
And their scholars and Pharisees murmured against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with the tax collectors and sinners?
And having answered, Jesus said to them, Those who are well have no need of a physician, but those faring badly.
I have not come to call the righteous but sinners to repentance.
And they said to him, Why do the disciples of John fast often, and make supplications, and likewise those of the Pharisees, but thine eat and drink.
And he said to them, Ye cannot make the sons of the wedding hall fast while the bridegroom is with them.
But the days will also come when the bridegroom will be taken away from them, then they will fast in those days.
And he also spoke a parable to them. No man puts a patch of a new garment on an old garment, otherwise both the new tears, and that from the new will not blend with the old.
And no man puts new wine into old wineskins, otherwise the new wine will burst the wineskins, and will itself be spilled, and the wineskins will be ruined.
But new wine must be put into fresh wineskins, and both are preserved together.
And no man having drunk old straightaway desires new, for he says, The old is better.

Now it came to pass for him to be going through the grain fields on a particular sabbath, and his disciples were plucking the ears and were eating, rubbing them in their hands.
But some of the Pharisees said to them, Why do ye what is not permitted to do on the sabbath day?
And having answered them, Jesus said, Have ye not read even this, what David did when he was hungry, and those who were with him,
how he entered into the house of God, and took and ate the loaves of the presentation, and also gave to those who were with him, which is not permitted to eat, except the priests alone?
And he said to them, The Son of man is lord also of the sabbath.
And it also came to pass on another sabbath for him to enter into the synagogue and teach. And a man was there, and his right hand was withered.
And the scholars and the Pharisees watched if he would heal on the sabbath, so that they might find an accusation against him.
But he knew their thoughts, and he said to the man who had the withered hand, Rise up, and stand forth in the midst. And having risen, he stood up.
Then Jesus said to them, I will question you. What? Is it permitted on the sabbath to do good, or to do harm, to save life, or to kill?
And having looked around on them all, he said to him, Stretch forth thy hand. And he did, and his hand was restored whole as the other.
But they were filled with fury, and deliberated with each other what they might do to Jesus.
And he happened in these days to go out onto the mountain to pray, and he was continuing all night in prayer to God.
Simon, whom he also named Peter, and Andrew his brother, James and John, Philip and Bartholomew,
Matthew and Thomas, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon who was called the Zealot,
Judas the son of James, and Judas Iscariot who also became a traitor.
And having come down with them, he stood on a level place. And a company of his disciples, and a large number of the people from all Judea and Jerusalem, and the maritime Tyre and Sidon, were those who came to hear him, and to be healed from their diseases,
also those who were afflicted with unclean spirits. And they were healed.
And all the multitude sought to touch him, because power came forth from him, and healed them all.
And having lifted up his eyes on his disciples, he said, Blessed are the poor, because the kingdom of God is what belongs to you.
Blessed are those who hunger now, because ye will be filled. Blessed are those who weep now, because ye will laugh.
Blessed are ye, when men will hate you, and when they will exclude you, and revile you, and cast out your name as evil, because of the Son of man.
Rejoice ye in that day, and leap, for behold, your reward is great in heaven, for their fathers did in the same way to the prophets.
However, woe to you the rich, because ye have received your consolation.
Woe to you who are filled now, because ye will hunger. Woe to you who laugh now, because ye will mourn and weep.
Woe when men will speak well of you, for their fathers did in the same way to the false prophets.
But I say to you, to those who hear, love your enemies. Do good to those who hate you.
Bless those who curse you. Pray for those who mistreat you.
To him who strikes thee on the cheek offer the other also, and from him who takes away thy cloak, also do not withhold thy coat.
Give to every man who asks thee, and from him who takes away thy personal things do not demand them back.
And as ye desire that men would do to you, do ye also to them likewise.
And if ye love those who love you, what credit is for you? For even sinners love those who love them.
And if ye do good to those who do good to you, what credit is for you? For even sinners do the same.
And if ye lend to whom ye hope to receive, what credit is for you? For even sinners lend to sinners, to receive as much again.
But love your enemies, and do good, and lend, despairing nothing, and your reward will be great. And ye will be sons of the Most High, because he is good toward the ungrateful and bad.
Become ye therefore merciful, even as your Father is merciful.
And do not criticize, and ye will, no, not be criticized. And do not condemn, and ye will, no, not be condemned. Forgive, and ye will be forgiven.
Give, and it will be given to you, good measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over, they will give into your bosom. For with the same measure with which ye measure, it will be measured again to you.
And he spoke a parable to them. Can a blind man lead a blind man? Will they not both fall into a ditch?
A disciple is not above his teacher, but every disciple who is fully developed will be as his teacher.
And why do thou see the speck in thy brother's eye, but do not perceive the beam in thine own eye?
Or how can thou say to thy brother, Brother, allow me to take out the speck that is in thine eye, when thou thyself do not see the beam in thine own eye? Thou hypocrite, first take out the beam from thine own eye, and then thou will see clearly to take out the speck in thy brother's eye.
For a good tree is not producing corrupt fruit, nor a corrupt tree producing good fruit.
For each tree is known from its own fruit. For they do not gather figs from thorns, nor do they harvest grapes from a bramble bush.
The good man out of the good treasure of his heart brings forth the good, and the bad man out of the bad treasure of his heart brings forth the bad, for out of the abundance of the heart his mouth speaks.
And why do ye call me, Lord, Lord, and not do the things that I say?
Every man who comes to me, and hears my sayings, and does them, I will show you to whom he is like.
He is like a man who builds a house, who dug and excavated, and laid a foundation upon the rock. And when a flood developed, the stream beat upon that house, and could not shake it, for it had been founded upon the rock.
But he who heard, and not having done, is like a man who built a house upon the soil without a foundation, on which the stream beat, and straightaway it fell. And the ruin of that house became great.

And when he completed all his sayings in the ears of the people, he entered into Capernaum.
And a certain centurion's bondman faring badly was going to perish, who was esteemed by him.
And having heard about Jesus, he sent elders of the Jews to him who asked him that, having come, he would save his bondman.
And when they came to Jesus they urged him earnestly, saying, He is worthy for whom thou may offer this,
for he loves our nation, and he himself built the synagogue for us.
And Jesus went with them. And when he was now not far distant from the house, the centurion sent friends to him, saying to him, Lord, be not troubled, for I am not worthy that thou should come under my roof.
Therefore neither did I consider myself worthy to come to thee, but speak by word, and my boy will be healed.
For I also am a man set under authority, having soldiers under myself. And I say to this man, Go, and he goes, and to another, Come, and he comes, and to my bondman, Do this, and he does.
And when Jesus heard these things, he marveled him, and having turned around to the multitude who followed him, he said, I say to you, not even in Israel have I found such great faith.
And those who were sent, having returned to the house, found the bondman who was feeble, being well.
And it came to pass on the next day that he went to a city called Nain, and a considerable number of his disciples went with him, also a large multitude.
Now when he came near to the gate of the city, behold, an only begotten son who died was being carried out for his mother. And she was a widow, and a considerable crowd of the city was with her.
And when the Lord saw her, he felt compassion toward her, and said to her, Weep not.
And having come, he touched the coffin, and the men carrying it stood still. And he said, Young man, I say to thee, arise.
And the dead man sat up, and began to speak. And he gave him to his mother.
And fear seized all. And they glorified God, saying, A great prophet has been raised among us, and, God came to help his people.
And this report about him went forth in the whole of Judea, and in all the region around.
And the disciples of John informed him about all these things.
And having summoned a certain two of his disciples, John sent them to Jesus, saying, Are thou he who comes, or do we look for another man?
And when they came to him, they said, John the immerser has sent us to thee, saying, Are thou he who comes, or do we look for another man?
And in the same hour he healed many from diseases and plagues and evil spirits. And he granted sight to many blind men.
the blind see, the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, the poor are preached good news.
And blessed is he, whoever will not be offended by me.
And after John's messengers departed, he began to say to the multitudes about John, What did ye go out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind?
But what did ye go out to see? A man clothed in soft raiment? Behold, those in elegant clothing, and existing in luxury, are in kingly places.
But what did ye go out to see? A prophet? Yea, I say to you, and much more than a prophet.
This is he about whom it is written, Behold, I send my agent before thy face, who will prepare thy way before thee.
For I say to you, among men born of women there is not one prophet greater than John the immerser, yet the smaller in the kingdom of God is greater than he.
And all the people having heard, and the tax collectors who were immersed the immersion of John, justified God.
But the Pharisees and the lawyers who were not immersed by him, rejected the purpose of God for themselves.
To what, then will I compare the men of this generation, and to what are they like?
They are like children sitting in the marketplace, and calling to each other, and saying, We piped to you, and ye did not dance. We mourned to you, and ye did not weep.
For John the immerser has come neither eating bread nor drinking wine, and ye say, He has a demon.
The Son of man has come eating and drinking, and ye say, Behold the man, a glutton and a drunkard, a friend of tax collectors and sinners!
And wisdom is justified from all her children.
And a certain man of the Pharisees asked him that he would eat with him. And having entered into the Pharisee's house, he sat down.
And behold, a woman in the city who was sinful. And when she knew that he sat in the Pharisee's house, having brought an alabaster cruse of ointment,
and having stood behind near his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with the tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head. And she kissed his feet much, and anointed them with the ointment.
But when the Pharisee who invited him saw it, he spoke within himself, saying, This man, if he were a prophet, would know who and what kind the woman is who touches him, that she is sinful.
And having responded, Jesus said to him, Simon, I have something to say to thee. And he says, speak Teacher.
There were two debtors to a certain creditor, the one owed five hundred denarii, and the other fifty.
And of them not having to repay, he forgave them both. Which of them therefore, do thou say, will love him more?
And having answered, Simon said, I suppose that it was to whom he forgave more. And he said to him, Thou have judged correctly.
And having turned to the woman, he said to Simon, See thou this woman? I entered into thy house; thou gave no water for my feet. But this woman has wet my feet with tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head.
Thou gave me no kiss, but this woman, since I came in, has not ceased kissing my feet much.
Thou did not anoint my head with olive oil, but this woman has anointed my feet with ointment.
For this reason I say to thee, her many sins are forgiven, because she loved much. But to whom little is forgiven, loves little.
And he said to her, Thy sins are forgiven.
And those who sat together began to say within themselves, Who is this who even forgives sins?
And he said to the woman, Thy faith has saved thee. Go in peace.

And it came to pass that he traveled through, by city and village in succession, announcing and preaching the good news of the kingdom of God, and the twelve men with him,
Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out,
and Joanna the wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many other women who served them from the things they possessed.
And when a large multitude gathered together, and those coming to him from each city, he spoke by a parable.
The man who sows went forth to sow his seed. And during his sowing, some fell by the way, and it was trampled, and the birds of the sky devoured it.
And another fell on the rock, and having grown, it withered away because of not having moisture.
And another fell amidst the thorns, and having grown together, the thorns choked it.
And another fell on the good ground, and having grown it produced fruit a hundredfold. As he said these things, he called out, He who has ears to hear, let him hear.
And his disciples questioned him, saying, What is this parable?
And he said, To you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to the others in parables, so that seeing they would not see, and hearing they would not understand.
Now the parable is this. The seed is the word of God.
And those by the way are those who hear, then the devil comes, and takes away the word from their heart, lest having believed, they would be saved.
And those on the rock are those who, when they hear, receive the word with joy. And these have no root, who believe for a time, and withdraw in time of trial.
And that which fell in the thorns, these are those who heard, and as they go they are choked by cares and wealth and pleasures of life, and do not bring to maturity.
But those in the good ground, these are those who in an good and right heart, having heard the word, hold it firm, and bring forth fruit in perseverance.
And no man, having lit a lamp, covers it with a container, or places it under a bed, but places it on a lampstand, so that those who enter in may see the light.
For there is no secret that will not become visible, nor hid, that will not be known and come to be visible.
Notice therefore how ye hear. For whoever has, to him will be given, and whoever has not, even what he seems to have will be taken from him.
And his mother and brothers came to him, and they could not come near him because of the crowd.
And it was reported to him, saying, Thy mother and thy brothers stand outside, desiring to see thee.
But having answered, he said to them, My mother and my brothers are these who hear the word of God and do it.
Now it came to pass on one of those days, that he entered into a boat, also his disciples. And he said to them, Let us pass through to the other side of the lake. And they launched forth,
but as they sailed he began to asleep. And a storm of wind came down on the lake, and they were filling up, and were in peril.
And having approached, they awoke him, saying, Master, master, we are perishing. And having risen, he rebuked the wind and the raging of the water, and they ceased, and it became calm.
And he said to them, Where is your faith? And having feared, they wondered, saying to each other, Who then is this man, that he commands even the winds and the water, and they obey him?
And they sailed toward the country of the Gadarenes, which is opposite Galilee.
And when he came forth upon the land, a certain man met him out of the city, who had demons of a considerable time. And he wore no clothing, and did not dwell in a house, but in the sepulchers.
And when he saw Jesus, having cried out, he fell down before him. And in a great voice he said, What is with me and with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the Most High God? I beseech thee, do not torment me.
For he commanded the unclean spirit to come out from the man, for many times it had seized him. And he was bound with chains and shackles, and guarded. And breaking the bonds apart, he was driven by the demon into the desolate regions.
And Jesus demanded him, saying, What is thy name? And he said, Legion, because many demons were entered into him.
And they entreated him that he would not command them to go out into the abyss.
Now a herd of considerable swine was there feeding on the mountain, and they implored him that he would allow them to enter into those. And he allowed them.
And the demons having come out from the man, they entered into the swine. And the herd stampeded down the slope into the lake, and were drowned.
And when those who tended them saw what happened, they fled and reported it in the city and in the fields.
And they came out to see what happened. And they came to Jesus, and found the man, from whom the demons had gone out, sitting near the feet of Jesus, clothed and in his right mind. And they were afraid.
And also those who saw it informed them how the man who was demon-possessed was saved.
And the whole multitude of the region around the Gadarenes besought him to depart from them, because they were gripped by great fear. And he, having embarked into the boat, returned.
But the man from whom the demons had gone out begged him to be with him. But Jesus sent him away, saying,
Return to thy house, and relate everything God did for thee. And he departed, proclaiming throughout the whole city how many things Jesus did for him.
And it came to pass during Jesus returning, the multitude welcomed him, for they were all waiting for him.
And behold, there came a man whose name was Jairus, and he was a ruler of the synagogue. And having fallen down near Jesus' feet, he besought him to come into his house,
because there was with him an only begotten daughter, about twelve years old, and she was dying. But during his going the multitudes thronged him.
And a woman being with an issue of blood for twelve years, who, although she spent her entire living on physicians, was unable to be healed by any,
having come from behind, she touched the border of his garment. And immediately the issue of her blood stayed.
And Jesus said, Who is he who touched me? But when they all denied, Peter and those with him, said, Master, the multitudes come together and crowd thee, and thou say, Who is he who touched me?
But Jesus said, Who touched me? For I perceived power having gone forth from me.
And when the woman saw that she was not hid, she came trembling. And having fallen down before him, she declared to him in the presence of all the people for what reason she touched him, and how she was healed immediately.
And he said to her, Cheer up, Daughter. Thy faith has healed thee. Go in peace.
While he still spoke, some man comes from the synagogue ruler, saying to him, Thy daughter has died. Do not trouble the teacher.
But having heard it, Jesus answered him, saying, Fear not, only believe and she will be saved.
And when he came to the house, he did not allow any man to enter in except Peter and John and James, and the father of the girl and the mother.
And all were weeping and bewailing her. But he said, Weep not. She did not die, but sleeps.
And they ridiculed him, knowing that she died.
But having sent them all away outside, having taken her by the hand, he called out, saying, Girl, awake.
And her spirit returned, and she rose up immediately. And he commanded to give her to eat.
And her parents were amazed, but he ordered them to tell no man that which happened.

And having summoned the twelve, he gave them power and authority over all demons, and to heal diseases.
And he sent them to preach the kingdom of God, and to heal those who were incapacitated.
And he said to them, Take nothing for the way, neither staffs, nor bag, nor bread, nor silver, nor have two coats each.
And into whatever house ye may enter, remain there, and from there depart.
And as many as will not receive you, when departing from that city, also shake off the dust from your feet for a testimony against them.
And having departed, they passed through the villages, preaching the good news, and healing everywhere.
But Herod the tetrarch heard of all that was done by him. And he was perplexed, because it was said by some that John was risen from the dead,
and by some that Elijah appeared, and by others that a prophet, one of the ancient men arose.
And Herod said, I beheaded John, but who is this about whom I hear such things? And he sought to see him.
And when the apostles returned, they related to him as many things as they did. And having taken them along, he withdrew in private into a desolate place of a city called Bethsaida.
But the multitudes having known, they followed him. And having received them, he spoke to them about the kingdom of God, and he cured those who had need of healing.
And the day began to decline, and the twelve having come near, they said to him, Send the multitude away, so that, after going into the villages and fields around, they may rest and find provision, because we are here in a desolate place.
But he said to them, Give ye them to eat. And they said, There are for us not more than five loaves and two fishes, unless, after going, we might buy food for all this people.
For there were about five thousand men. And he said to his disciples, Make them sit down in groups of fifty each.
And they did so, and made them all sit down.
And after taking the five loaves and the two fishes, having looked up to heaven, he blessed them, and broke in pieces, and gave to the disciples to set before the multitude.
And they ate, and were all filled. And there were taken up to them of the remaining fragments, twelve baskets.
And it came to pass, as he was praying privately, the disciples were with him. And he questioned them, saying, Who do the multitudes say that I am?
And having answered, they said, John the immerser, but others, Elijah, and others, that a certain prophet of the ancient men arose.
And he said to them, But ye, who say ye that I am? And having answered, Peter said, The Christ of God.
But having chided them, he commanded to tell this to no man,
saying, It is necessary for the Son of man to suffer many things, and be rejected by the elders and chief priests and scholars, and be killed, and the third day to rise.
And he said to all, If any man wants to come behind me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross, and follow me.
For whoever wants to save his life will lose it, but whoever may lose his life because of me, this man will save it.
For what is a man benefited, having gained the whole world, but having lost or having forfeited himself?
For whoever may be ashamed of me and of my words, the Son of man will be ashamed of this man when he comes in his glory, and of the Father, and of the holy agents.
But I tell you truly, there are some of those who stand here, who will, no, not taste of death, till they see the kingdom of God.
And it came to pass about eight days after these sayings, that after taking Peter and John and James, he went up onto the mountain to pray.
And as he was praying, the appearance of his face became different, and his clothing glistening white.
And behold, two men talked with him, who were Moses and Elijah,
who, having appeared in glory, spoke of his departure, which he was going to fulfill at Jerusalem.
But Peter and those with him were weighed down with sleep, and having become awake, they saw his glory, and the two men who stood with him.
And it came to pass, as they were departing from him, Peter said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here, and we could make three tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elijah, not knowing what he was saying.
And while he was speaking these things, a cloud came and overshadowed them. And they were afraid as they entered into the cloud.
And a voice came out of the cloud, saying, This is my beloved Son. Hear ye him.
And at the occurrence of the voice, Jesus was found alone. And they kept silent, and informed no man in those days any of the things that they have seen.
And it came to pass, on the next day, when they came down from the mountain, a large crowd met him.
And behold, a man from the crowd cried out, saying, Teacher, I beseech thee to look upon my son, because he is the only begotten to me.
And lo, a spirit seizes him, and he suddenly cries out, and it convulses him with foaming. And it departs from him difficultly, injuring him.
And I begged thy disciples that they might cast it out, and they could not.
And having answered, Jesus said, O faithless and perverted generation, how long will I be with you and endure you? Bring thy son here.
And as he was still coming, the demon tore him, and he convulsed. But Jesus rebuked the unclean spirit, and healed the boy, and gave him back to his father.
And they were all amazed at the majesty of God. But while all were wondering at all the things which Jesus did, he said to his disciples,
Place ye these sayings into your ears, for the Son of man is going to be delivered up into the hands of men.
But they did not understand this saying, and it was concealed from them, so that they did not perceive it. And they were afraid to ask him about this saying.
But a thought entered among them, which of them may be greater.
But having perceived the thought of their heart, having taken a child, Jesus stood it beside him,
and he said to them, Whoever may receive this child in my name receives me, and whoever may receive me receives him who sent me, for he who exists smaller among you all, this man will be great.
And having answered, John said, Master, we saw a certain man casting out demons in thy name, and we forbade him, because he does not follow with us.
But Jesus said to him, Do not forbid, for he who is not against us is for us.
And it came to pass, while fulfilling the days for his ascension, that he also set his face to go to Jerusalem.
And he sent agents before his face, and they went. And having gone, they entered into a village of Samaritans, so as to make ready for him.
And they did not receive him, because his face was going to Jerusalem.
And his disciples James and John having seen, they said, Lord, do thou want that we should call fire to come down from the sky, and consume them, as also Elijah did?
But having turned around, he rebuked them, and said, Ye do not know what kind of spirit ye are.
For the Son of man came not to destroy the lives of men, but to save. And they went to another village.
And it came to pass while they went on the way, a certain man said to him, I will follow thee wherever thou may go, Lord.
And Jesus said to him, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the sky, nests, but the Son of man has not where he might lay his head.
And he said to another, Follow me. But he said, Lord, allow me first, after departing, to bury my father.
But Jesus said to him, Leave the dead to bury their own dead, but thou, after departing, proclaim the kingdom of God.
And also another said, I will follow thee, Lord, but first allow me to bid farewell to those in my house.
But Jesus said to him, No man, having put his hand to a plow, and looking to things behind, is fit for the kingdom of God.

Now after these things the Lord also appointed seventy other men, and sent them by twos before his face into every city and place where he himself was going to come.
Therefore he said to them, The harvest indeed is plentiful, but the workmen are few. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send forth workmen into his harvest.
Go ye. Behold, I send you forth as lambs in the midst of wolves.
Carry no bag, no pouch, no shoes, and greet no man on the way.
And into whatever house ye enter, first say, Peace to this house.
And if a son of peace is there, your peace will rest upon him, and if not, it will return to you.
And remain in the same house eating and drinking from their things, for the workman is worthy of his wage. Do not depart from house to house.
And into whatever city ye enter, and they receive you, eat the things that are set before you.
And heal the weak in it, and say to them, The kingdom of God has come near to you.
But into whatever city ye enter, and they will not receive you, after departing into the thoroughfares of it, say,
Even the dust that clings on us from your city, we wipe off against you. Nevertheless know ye this, that the kingdom of God has come near to you.
I say to you, that it will be more tolerable in that day for Sodom, than for that city.
Woe to thee, Chorazin! Woe to thee, Bethsaida! Because if the mighty works were done in Tyre and Sidon, which were done in you, they would have repented long ago, sitting in sackcloth and ashes.
But it will be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon in the judgment, than for you.
And thou, Capernaum, which was exalted to the sky, will be thrust down to Hades.
He who hears you hears me, and he who rejects you rejects me, and he who rejects me rejects him who sent me.
And the seventy returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the demons are made subject to us in thy name.
And he said to them, I beheld Satan fallen as lightning from the sky.
Behold, I give you authority to tread over serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy, and, no, nothing will harm you.
Nevertheless do not rejoice in this, that the spirits are made subject to you, but rejoice because your names are written in the heavens.
In the same hour Jesus rejoiced in the Spirit, and said, I thank thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and the earth, that thou hid these things from the wise and astute, and revealed them to the childlike. Yea, Father, because it became pleasing this way in thy sight.
And having turned to the disciples, he said, All things were delivered to me by my Father. And no man knows who the Son is, except the Father, and who the Father is, except the Son, and he to whomever the Son wants to reveal him.
And having turning toward the disciples in private, he said, Blessed are the eyes that see what ye see.
For I say to you, that many prophets and kings desired to see what ye see, and did not see, and to hear what ye hear, and did not hear.
And behold, a certain lawyer stood up testing him, and saying, Teacher, having done what, would I inherit eternal life?
And he said to him, What is written in the law? How read thou?
And having answered, he said, Thou shall love the Lord thy God from thy whole heart, and from thy whole soul, and from thy whole strength, and from thy whole mind, and thy neighbor as thyself.
And he said to him, Thou answered correctly. Do this and thou will live.
But he, wanting to justify himself, said to Jesus, And who is my neighbor?
And having replied, Jesus said, A certain man was going down from Jerusalem to Jericho. And he encountered bandits, who also, having stripped him and having beat him, departed having left him being half dead.
And by coincidence a certain priest was going down on that road, and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side.
And likewise also a Levite who happened upon the place, having come, and having looked, passed by on the other side.
But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came to him, and when he saw him, felt compassion.
And having come, he wrapped up his wounds, pouring on olive oil and wine. And having set him on his own beast, he brought him to an inn, and took care of him.
And on the morrow when departing, after taking out two denarii, he gave them to the innkeeper, and said to him, Take care of him, and whatever thou might spend more, I will repay thee at my return.
Which therefore, of these three, appears to thee to have become neighbor to the man who fell among the bandits?
And he said, He who did mercy with him. Therefore Jesus said to him, Go, and do thou likewise.
And it came to pass as they went, he also entered into a certain village, and a certain woman named Martha received him into her house.
And she was sister to this woman called Mary, who also, having sat at Jesus' feet, was listening to his word.
But Martha was encumbered about much serving. And having stood near, she said, Lord, do thou not care that my sister left me behind to serve alone? Speak to her therefore that she may help me.
But having answered, Jesus said to her, Martha, Martha, thou are anxious and troubled about many things,
but one thing is necessary, and Mary has chosen the good part, which will not be taken away from her.

And it came to pass as he was in a certain place praying, that when he ceased, a certain man of his disciples said to him, Lord, teach us to pray as John also taught his disciples.
And he said to them, When ye pray, say, Our Father in the heavens, hallowed be thy name. May thy kingdom come, may thy will happen on the earth as also in heaven.
Give us our bread sufficient for each day.
And forgive us our sins, for we ourselves also forgive every man who is indebted to us. And bring us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.
And he said to them, Which of you will have a friend, and will go to him at midnight, and say to him, Friend, lend me three loaves,
since a friend arrived from the road to me, and I do not have what I would set before him,
and that man from inside, having answered, would say, Do not cause toils for me. The door is now shut, and my children are with me in bed. I am not able, after getting up, to give thee?
I say to you, though he will not give him, after getting up, because he is his friend, yet because of his persistence, having awaken, he will give him as many as he needs.
And I say to you, ask, and it will be given you. Seek, and ye will find. Knock, and it will be opened.
For every man who asks receives, and he who seeks finds, and to him who knocks it will be opened.
And which father of you, if the son will ask a loaf, will give him a stone, or also if a fish, in place of a fish will give him a serpent?
Or if he should ask for an egg, will he give him a scorpion?
If ye then, being evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more the Father from heaven will give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?
And he was casting out a demon, and it was mute. And it happened when the demon was gone out, the mute man spoke. And the multitudes marveled,
but some of them said, He casts out the demons by Beelzebub, ruler of the demons.
And others, challenging, sought from him a sign from the sky.
But he, knowing their thoughts, said to them, Every kingdom that was divided against itself is made desolate, and a house against a house falls.
And if Satan also is divided against himself, how will his kingdom be made to stand? Because ye say that I cast out the demons by Beelzebub.
And if I cast out the demons by Beelzebub, by whom do your sons cast them out? Because of this they will be your judges.
But if by a finger of God I cast out the demons, then the kingdom of God has come upon you.
When the fully armed strong man guards his palace, the things possessed by him are in peace,
but when a stronger than he comes, after defeating him, he takes away his full armor in which he trusted, and divides his booty.
He who is not with me is against me, and he who does not gather with me scatters.
When the unclean spirit departs out of the man, it passes through waterless places seeking rest. And not finding, it says, I will return to my house from where I came out.
And when it comes, it finds it swept and put in order.
Then it goes, and takes along seven other spirits more evil than itself, and having enter in, it dwells there. And the last state of that man becomes worse than the first.
And it came to pass, as he said these things, a certain woman, having lifted up her voice out of the crowd, said to him, Blessed is the belly that bore thee, and the breasts that thou suckled.
But he said, Blessed rather, are those who hear the word of God, and keep it.
And when the multitudes gathered together he began to say, This generation is evil. They seek a sign, and no sign will be given to it except the sign of Jonah, the prophet.
For as Jonah became a sign to the Ninevites, so also the Son of man will be to this generation.
The queen of the south will awake in the judgment with the men of this generation, and will condemn them, because she came from the ends of the earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, and behold, a greater than Solomon is here.
The men of Nineveh will rise up in the judgment with this generation, and will condemn it, because they repented at the preaching of Jonah, and behold, a greater than Jonah is here.
And no man, having lit a lamp, puts it in a concealed place, nor under the bushel, but on the lampstand, so that those who enter in may see the light.
The lamp of thy body is the eye. Therefore, when thine eye is sound, thy whole body is also bright, but when it is bad, thy body is also dark.
Watch therefore the light in thee not be darkness.
If therefore thy whole body is bright, not having any part dark, the whole will be bright, as when the lamp illuminates thee by the radiance.
Now as he spoke a certain Pharisee asks him that he might dine with him. And having entered in, he sat down.
And when the Pharisee saw, he marveled that he did not first wash before dinner.
And the Lord said to him, Now ye Pharisees cleanse the outside of the cup and of the platter, but your interior is full of plundering and wickedness.
Ye foolish men, did not he who made the outside also make the inside?
But give compassion, things that are inside, and behold, all things are clean to you.
But woe to you Pharisees! Because ye tithe mint and rue and every plant, and pass by justice and the love of God. It is necessary to do these things, and not to neglect those things.
Woe to you Pharisees! Because ye love the place of honor in the synagogues, and the greetings in the marketplaces.
Woe to you scholars and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because ye are like the unseen sepulchers, and the men who walk over them do not know.
And having answered, a certain man of the lawyers says to him, Teacher, in saying these things thou rebuke us also.
And he said, Woe also to you lawyers! Because ye load men with burdens difficult to bear, and ye yourselves touch not the burdens with one of your fingers.
Woe to you! Because ye build the sepulchers of the prophets, but your fathers killed them.
Consequently, ye testify and approve the works of your fathers, because they indeed killed them, and ye build their sepulchers.
Because of this also the wisdom of God said, I will send to them prophets and apostles. And some of them they will kill and persecute,
so that the blood of all the prophets that was shed from the foundation of the world may be required of this generation,
from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zachariah, who perished between the altar and the sanctuary. Yes, I say to you, it will be required of this generation.
Woe to you lawyers! Because ye took away the key of knowledge. Ye did not enter in yourselves, and ye hindered those who were entering in.
And after he said these things to them, the scholars and the Pharisees began to harass him extremely, and to provoke him to speak impulsively about more things,
waiting to ambush him, seeking to catch something out of his mouth so that they might accuse him.

During which time the myriads of the multitude having gathered together so as to trample each other, he began first to say to his disciples, Take heed to yourselves from the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.
But there is nothing covered up that will not be revealed, and hidden that will not be known.
Therefore, as many things as ye have said in the darkness will be heard in the light, and what ye have spoken in the ear in the inner chambers will be proclaimed upon the housetops.
And I say to you my friends, Be not afraid of those who kill the body, and after these things not having anything more severe to do.
But I will show you whom ye should fear. Fear him, who, after killing, has power to cast into hell. Yes, I say to you, fear ye him.
Are not five sparrows sold for two copper coins? And not one of them is forgotten in the sight of God.
But even the hairs of your head are all numbered. Fear not, therefore, ye are superior to many sparrows.
And I say to you, every man who will confess in me before men, the Son of man will also confess in him before the agents of God,
but he who denies me in the presence of men will be denied in the presence of the agents of God.
And every man who will speak a word against the Son of man, it will be forgiven him, but to him who blasphemed against the Holy Spirit it will not be forgiven.
And when they bring you to the synagogues, and the principle positions, and the offices of authority, be not anxious how or what ye should answer in defense, or what ye should say,
for the Holy Spirit will teach you in the same hour what ye ought to say.
And a certain man out of the crowd said to him, Teacher, speak to my brother to divide the inheritance with me.
But he said to him, Man, who appointed me a judge or an arbitrator over you?
And he said to them, Watch, and keep away from greed, because to any man, life to him is not in the abundance of things possessed by him.
And he spoke a parable to them, saying, The land of a certain rich man brought forth well.
And he pondered within himself, saying, What shall I do, because I have nowhere I will store my crops?
And he said, I will do this. I will dismantle my barns, and I will build greater, and there I will store all my grain and my goods.
And I will say to my soul, Soul, thou have many goods laid up for many years. Take thine ease, eat, drink, be merry.
But God said to him, Thou foolish man, they demand thy soul from thee this night, and the things that thou prepared, whose will they be?
So is he who stores up for himself, and is not being rich toward God.
And he said to his disciples, Because of this I say to you, be not anxious for your life, what ye may eat, nor for the body, what ye may wear.
For the life is more than the food, and the body, the clothing.
Consider the ravens, because they do not sow, nor do they reap, for which there is no storehouse nor barn, and God feeds them. How much ye are worth more than the birds.
And which of you by being anxious can add one cubit to his age?
If then ye are not able to do even the least, why are ye anxious about the rest?
Consider the lilies, how they grow. They toil not, nor do they spin, and I say to you, not even Solomon in all his glory was arrayed like one of these.
And if God so clothes the grass in the field, which today is, and tomorrow being cast into the oven, how much more you, O ye of little faith?
And do not seek what ye may eat, and what ye may drink, and do not be unsettled.
For the nations of the world seek all these things, and your Father knows that ye have need of these things.
However, seek ye the kingdom of God, and all these things will be added to you.
Fear not, little flock, because your Father is well pleased to give you the kingdom.
Sell things possessed by you, and give charity. Make for yourselves purses not becoming old, a treasure unfailing in the heavens, where no thief approaches, nor moth corrupts.
For where your treasure is, there your heart will be also.
Let your loins be girded about, and the lights burning,
and be ye like men waiting for their lord, when he may return from the wedding festivities, so that when he comes and knocks, they may straightaway open to him.
Blessed are those bondmen whom the lord when he comes will find watching. Truly I say to you, that he will gird himself, and will cause them to sit down, and having come, will serve them.
And if he should come in the second watch, and should come in the third watch, and find so, blessed are those bondmen.
But know this, that if the house-ruler had known in what hour the thief was coming, he would have watched, and would not have allowed his house to be broken into.
Therefore, ye also become ready, because the Son of man comes at that hour ye do not suppose.
And Peter said to him, Lord, did thou speak this parable to us, or also to all?
And the Lord said, Who then is the faithful and wise manager whom his lord will appoint over his service to give the provision on time?
Blessed is that bondman whom his lord when he comes will find so doing.
Truly I say to you, that he will appoint him over the things being possessed by him.
But if that bondman should say in his heart, My lord is late to come, and should begin to beat the servant boys and the servant girls, and to eat and drink, and to be drunken,
the lord of that bondman will arrive in a day that he does not expect, and in an hour that he is not aware, and will cut him in two, and will place his portion with the unbelieving.
And that bondman who knew his lord's will, and who did not prepare, nor do according to his will, will be beaten much,
but he who did not know, and did things worthy of blows, will be beaten little. And to every man to whom much was given, much will be required from him. And to whom they entrust much, they will ask him more abundantly.
I came to cast fire upon the earth, and what I desire is if it were kindled already.
But I have an immersion to be immersed, and how am I constrained until it will be accomplished.
Do ye suppose that I came to give peace on the earth? I tell you, no, but rather division.
For henceforth there will be five in one house divided, three against two, and two against three.
A father will be divided against a son, and a son against a father, a mother against a daughter, and a daughter against a mother, a mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law, and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law.
And he also said to the multitudes, When ye see a cloud rising from the west, straightaway ye say, A shower is coming, and so it happens.
And when a south wind is blowing, ye say, There will be heat, and it happens.
Ye hypocrites, ye know how to examine the face of the earth and the sky, but how can ye not examine this season?
And also why do ye not judge yourselves what is right?
For when thou go with thine opponent to the magistrate on the way give effort to be delivered from him, lest he may drag thee to the judge, and the judge may deliver thee to the officer, and the officer would cast thee into prison.
I say to thee, thou will, no, not come out from there, until thou have paid even the last mite.

Now some were present at the same time who informed him about the Galileans whose blood Pilate mingled with their sacrifices.
And having answered, Jesus said to them, Do ye suppose that these Galileans became sinful above all the Galileans because they have suffered such things?
I tell you, no, but if ye do not repent, ye will all perish similarly.
Or those eighteen upon whom the tower in Siloam fell and killed them. Do ye think that these became debtors above all the men who dwell in Jerusalem?
I tell you, no, but if ye do not repent, ye will all likewise perish.
And he spoke this parable. A certain man had a fig tree planted in his vineyard, and he came seeking fruit on it, and found none.
And he said to the vine workman, Behold, three years I come seeking fruit on this fig tree, and find none. Cut it down, why also waste the ground?
And having answered, he says to him, Sir, allow it this year also until I may dig around it and cast manure.
Although surely it should bear fruit, and if not, in the coming year thou will cut it down.
And he was teaching in one of the synagogues on the sabbath day.
And behold, there was a woman who had a spirit of infirmity eighteen years. And she was bent over, and not being able to straighten up completely.
And when Jesus saw her, he called out, and said to her, Woman, thou are loosed from thine infirmity.
And he laid his hands upon her, and immediately she was made straight, and glorified God.
And having responded, the synagogue-ruler, being indignant because Jesus healed on the sabbath, answered and said to the multitude, There are six days in which he ought to work. Therefore coming in these, be healed, and not on the day of the sabbath.
But the Lord therefore answered him and said, Ye hypocrites, does not each of you on the sabbath loose his ox or his donkey from the stall, and after leading away, give to drink?
And ought not this woman, being a daughter of Abraham whom Satan has bound, lo, eighteen years, be loosed from this bond on the day of the sabbath?
And as he said these things all those opposing him were shamed, and all the multitude rejoiced for all the glorious things that were done by him.
And he said, What is the kingdom of God like, and to what will I compare it?
It is like a grain of a mustard plant, which having taken, a man cast into his own garden. And it grew and developed into a great tree, and the birds of the sky lodged in the branches if it.
And again he said, To what will I compare the kingdom of God?
It is like leaven that a woman having taken, hid in three measures of meal, until the whole was leavened.
And he went through by cities and villages, teaching, and making a journey toward Jerusalem.
And a certain man said to him, Lord, are they few who are being saved? And he said to them,
Compete to enter in by the narrow gate, because many, I say to you, will seek to enter in, and will not be able.
From the time the house-ruler has risen up, and has closed the door, and ye begin to stand outside, and to knock the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us, and having answered, he will say to you, I know not where ye are from,
then ye will begin to say, We ate and drank in thy presence, and thou taught in our thoroughfares.
And he will say, I tell you, I know not where ye are from. Depart from me, all ye workmen of unrighteousness.
There will be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth, when ye will see Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the prophets in the kingdom of God, and you being thrust out.
And they will arrive from the east and west, and from the north and south, and will sit down in the kingdom of God.
And behold, there are last who will be first, and there are first who will be last.
In the same day some Pharisees came, saying to him, Get thee out and depart from here, because Herod wants to kill thee.
And he said to them, Having gone, say to this fox, Behold, I cast out demons and finish cures today and tomorrow, and the third day I am fully perfected.
Nevertheless it is necessary for me to go today and tomorrow and the following, because it is not possible for a prophet to perish outside of Jerusalem.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, that kills the prophets, and stones those who are sent to her. How often I wanted to gather thy children together as a hen does her brood under her wings, and ye would not.
Behold, your house is left to you desolate. And I say to you, that ye will, no, not see me, until it will come when ye say, Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord.

And it came to pass, when he went into the house of a certain man of the chiefs of the Pharisees on a sabbath to eat bread, that they were watching him.
And behold, there was a certain man in front of him afflicted with edema.
And having responded, Jesus spoke to the lawyers and Pharisees, saying, Is it permitted to heal on the sabbath?
But they were silent. And having taken him, he healed him and released him.
And having responded, he said to them, Of which of you will a son or an ox fall into a pit, and he will not straightaway lift him out on the day of the sabbath?
And they could not answer him back to these things.
And he spoke a parable to those who were invited when he noticed how they chose out the chief places, saying to them,
When thou are invited by any man to wedding festivities, do not sit down in the chief place, lest there may be a more honorable man than thou who was invited by him.
And he who invited thee and him, having come, will say to thee, Give place to this man, and then thou will begin with embarrassment to take the last place.
But when thou are invited, having gone, sit down in the last place, so that when he who has invited thee comes, he will say to thee, Friend, go up higher, then it will be esteem to thee in the presence of those dining with thee.
Because every man who lifts himself up will be made lower, and he who makes himself lower will be lifted up.
And he also said to the man who invited him, When thou make a dinner or a supper, do not call thy friends, nor thy brothers, nor thy kinsmen, nor prosperous neighbors, lest they also invite thee in return, and a recompense be made to thee.
But when thou make a feast, call the poor, the maimed, the lame, the blind,
and thou will be blessed, because they do not have to recompense thee, for it will be recompensed to thee at the resurrection of the righteous.
And a certain man of those dining together having heard these things, he said to him, Blessed is he who will eat dinner in the kingdom of God.
And he said to him, A certain man made a great supper, and he invited many.
And he sent forth his bondman at the hour of the meal to say to those who were invited, Come, because all things are now ready.
And they all from one began to make excuse. The first said to him, I have bought a field, and I have need to go out and see it. I ask thee have me excused.
And another said, I bought five yoke of oxen, and I go to test them. I ask thee have me excused.
And another said, I married a wife, and because of this I cannot come.
And that bondman, having come, he informed his lord these things. Then the house-ruler having become angry, he said to his bondman, Go out quickly into the thoroughfares and lanes of the city, and bring here the poor and maimed and crippled and blind.
And the bondman said, Lord, as thou commanded it has happened, and yet there is room.
And the lord said to the bondman, Go out into the roads and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be filled.
For I say to you, that none of those men who were invited will taste of my supper. For many are called, but few chosen.
Now many multitudes went with him, and having turned, he said to them,
If any man comes to me, and does not regard as inferior his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers, and sisters, and besides his own life also, he cannot be my disciple.
And whoever does not bear his cross, and come behind me, cannot be my disciple.
For which of you wanting to build a tower, does not, having first sat down, count the cost whether he has the things for completion?
So that perhaps, having laid its foundation, and not being able to finish, all those who see begin to ridicule him,
saying, This man began to build, and was not able to finish.
Or what king going to encounter another king in war, will not, having first sat down, consult whether he is able with ten thousand to meet him who comes against him with twenty thousand?
And if not, while he is still far off, having sent a delegation, he asks the things about peace.
So therefore every man of you who does not renounce all things being possessed by him, cannot be my disciple.
The salt material is good, but if the salt material becomes tasteless, by what will it be seasoned?
It is fit neither for the land nor for manure; they cast it out. He who has ears to hear, let him hear.

Now all the tax collectors and sinners were approaching him to hear him.
And the Pharisees and the scholars murmured, saying, This man receives sinners and eats with them.
And he spoke this parable to them, saying,
What man of you, having a hundred sheep, and having lost one of them, does not leave behind the ninety-nine in the wilderness, and go for that which was lost until he finds it?
And when he finds it, he lays it on his shoulders, rejoicing.
And when he comes to the house, he calls together his men friends and his men neighbors, saying to them, Rejoice with me, because I have found my sheep that was lost.
I say to you, that thus there will be joy in heaven over one sinner who repents, than over ninety-nine righteous men who have no need of repentance.
Or what woman having ten drachmas, if she lose one drachma, does not light a lamp, and sweep the house, and seek diligently until she finds it?
And when she has found it, she calls together her lady friends and lady neighbors, saying, Rejoice with me, because I found the drachma that I lost.
Thus I say to you, there becomes joy in the presence of the agents of God over one sinner who repents.
And he said, A certain man had two sons,
and the younger of them said to his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falls to me. And he divided to them his living.
And not many days after, the younger son, having gathered all together, journeyed into a distant country, and there he squandered his wealth living recklessly.
And when he spent all, a mighty famine developed in that country, and he began to be in want.
And having gone, he was joined to one of the citizens of that country, and he sent him into his fields to feed swine.
And he longed to fill his belly from the husks that the swine ate, and no man gave to him.
But when he came to himself, he said, How many hired men of my father's have abundance of loaves, but I am perishing with hunger.
After rising, I will go to my father, and will say to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight.
I am no more worthy to be called thy son. Make me as one of thy hired men.
And having risen, he went to his father. But while he was still distant, afar off, his father saw him and felt compassion. And having ran, he fell on his neck, and kissed him much.
And the son said to him, Father, I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight. I am no more worthy to be called thy son.
But the father said to his bondmen, Bring forth the best robe and clothe him, and give a ring for his hand, and shoes for his feet.
And having brought the fatted calf, kill it, and having eaten, we will be cheerful,
because this my son was dead, and became alive again. And he was lost, and is found. And they began to be cheerful.
But his elder son was in a field. And while coming, having approached the house, he heard music and dancing.
And having summoned one of the boys, he inquired what these things might be.
And he said to him, Thy brother arrived, and thy father has killed the fatted calf, because he received him back healthy.
But he was angry, and would not go in. Therefore, his father having come out, he called him.
But having answered, he said to his father, Lo, so many years do I serve thee, and I never passed by a commandment of thine, and yet thou never gave me a goat that I might be merry with my friends.
But when this thy son came, who has devoured thy living with harlots, thou killed for him the fatted calf.
And he said to him, Child, thou are always with me, and all my things are yours.
But it was needful to make merry and be glad, because this thy brother was dead, and became alive again, and was lost, and was found.

And he also said to his disciples, There was a certain rich man who had a manager, and this man was accused to him as squandering things possessed by him.
And having called him, he said to him, What is this I hear about thee? Render the account of thy management, for thou can no longer manage.
And the manager said within himself, What shall I do because my lord takes away the management from me? I am not able to dig. I am ashamed to beg.
I know what I will do, so that when I am removed from the management they may receive me into their houses.
And having summoned each one of his lord's debtors, he said to the first, How much do thou owe to my lord?
And he said, A hundred measures of olive oil. And he said to him, Receive thy document, and having sat down, quickly write fifty.
Next he said to another, And how much do thou owe? And he said, A hundred measures of wheat. And he says to him, Receive thy document, and write eighty.
And his lord commended the unrighteous manager because he did shrewdly. Because the sons of this age are shrewder in their own generation than the sons of the light.
And I say to you, make friends for yourselves from the mammon of unrighteousness, so that, when ye cease, they may receive you into the eternal dwellings.
The man faithful in the least is faithful also in much, and the man unrighteous in the least is unrighteous also in much.
If therefore ye did not become faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will entrust to you what is true?
And if ye did not become faithful in the alien, who will give thine to you?
No servant can serve two masters, for either he will hate the one and love the other, or he will hold to one and despise the other. Ye cannot serve God and mammon.
And the Pharisees, being lovers of money, heard all these things, and they sneered him.
And he said to them, Ye are those who declare yourselves righteous in the sight of men, but God knows your hearts. Because what is lofty among men is an abomination in the sight of God.
The law and the prophets were until John. From that time the kingdom of God is proclaimed good news, and every man in it is treated aggressively.
But it is easier for the heaven and the earth to pass away, than for one tittle of the law to fall.
Every man who divorces his wife and marries another, commits adultery, and every man who marries her who has been divorced from a husband commits adultery.
Now there was a certain rich man, and he was clothed in purple and fine linen, faring sumptuously daily.
But there was a certain poor man named Lazarus, who had been placed near his gate, covered with sores,
and longing to be fed with the crumbs that fell from the rich man's table. But even the dogs that came licked his sores.
And it came to pass for the poor man to die and be carried by the agents to Abraham's bosom. And the rich man also died and was buried.
And having lifted up his eyes in Hades, being in torments, he sees Abraham from afar and Lazarus by his bosom.
And having cried out, he said, Father Abraham, be merciful to me, and send Lazarus, so that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, because I am in agony in this flame.
But Abraham said, Child, remember that thou in thy lifetime received thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things. But now here he is comforted and thou are in agony.
And besides all these things, between us and you a great chasm is fixed, so that those here who want to cross over to you are not able, nor may those go across from there to us.
And he said, I beg thee therefore, father, that thou would send him to my father's house,
for I have five brothers, that he may testify to them, lest they also come into this place of torment.
But Abraham says to him, They have Moses and the prophets. Let them hear them.
And he said, No, father Abraham, but if some man would go to them from the dead they will repent.
And he said to him, If they do not listen to Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded if some man would rise from the dead.

And he said to his disciples, It is impossible for the stumbling-blocks not to come, but woe to him through whom they come!
It is better for him if a donkey-powered millstone were hanged about his neck, and he were thrown into the sea, than that he should cause one of these little ones to stumble.
Take heed to yourselves. And if thy brother should sin against thee, rebuke him, and if he repents, forgive him.
And if he should sin against thee seven times in the day, and seven times in the day turn back, saying, I repent, thou will forgive him.
And the apostles said to the Lord, Increase faith for us.
And the Lord said, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard plant, ye would say to this sycamine tree, Be thou uprooted and be planted in the sea, and it would have obeyed you.
But which of you having a bondman plowing or feeding livestock, who, when he comes in from the field, will straightaway say, After coming near, sit down?
Will he not rather say to him, Prepare what I may dine, and having gird thyself, serve me until I eat and drink, and after these things thou will eat and drink?
Does he have a favor for that bondman because he did the things that were commanded? I think not.
Thus ye also, when ye did all the things that were commanded you, say, We are unprofitable bondmen, because we have done what we are obligated to do.
And it came to pass as he went to Jerusalem, that he was passing through the middle of Samaria and Galilee.
And as he entered into a certain village, ten leprous men who stood from afar met him.
And they raised a voice, saying, Jesus, Master, be merciful to us.
And when he saw them, he said to them, After departing, display yourselves to the priests. And it came to pass, during their going they were cleansed.
And one of them, when he saw that he was healed, turned back with a great voice glorifying God.
And he fell upon his face beside his feet giving him thanks. And he was a Samaritan.
And having answered, Jesus said, Were not the ten cleansed? But where are the nine?
Were there none found who returned to give glory to God, except this foreigner?
And he said to him, After rising, go. Thy faith has healed thee.
And questioned by the Pharisees when the kingdom of God comes, he answered them and said, The kingdom of God does not come with observation,
nor will they say, Lo, here! or, Lo, there! For behold, the kingdom of God is inside of you.
And he said to the disciples, The days will come when ye will long to see one of the days of the Son of man, and ye will not see it.
And they will say to you, Lo, here! Lo, there! Do not depart, nor pursue.
For just as the lightning, its flashing from under the sky to under the sky, illuminates, so will the Son of man be in his day.
But first it is necessary for him to suffer many things and be rejected from this generation.
And just as it happened in the days of Noah, so also it will be in the days of the Son of man.
They ate, they drank, they married, they were given in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the ark, and the flood came and destroyed them all.
And likewise as it happened in the days of Lot. They ate, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted, they built.
But in that day Lot went out from Sodom he rained fire and brimstone from the sky, and destroyed them all.
It will be according to these things in that day the Son of man is revealed.
In that day, he who will be on the housetop, and his vessels in the house, let him not go down to take them up. And let him who is in the field likewise not return for the things behind.
Remember Lot's wife.
Whoever will seek to save his life will lose it, and whoever will lose it will keep it alive.
I say to you, in that night there will be two in one bed. The one man will be taken, and the other man will be left.
Two will be grinding together. The one woman will be taken, and the other woman will be left.
This verse is not in the majority of the Greek manuscripts.
And having answered, they say to him, Where, Lord? And he said to them, Where the body is, there the vultures will be gathered together.

And he also spoke a parable to them about it being necessary to always pray, and not to give up,
saying, In a certain city there was a judge who did not fear God, and did not regard man.
And a widow was in that city, and she came to him, saying, Avenge me of my opponent.
And for a time he would not, but after these things he said within himself, Although I fear not God, and regard not man,
yet because this widow causes me a beating, I will avenge her, lest by no end of coming she give me a black eye.
And the Lord said, Hear ye what the unrighteous judge says.
And God, will he, no, not do the vengeance of his chosen who cry out to him day and night, and yet being patient toward them?
I say to you, that he will do their vengeance speedily. Nevertheless, when the Son of man comes, will he then find faith on the earth?
And he also spoke this parable to some of those who were persuaded in themselves that they were righteous, and disdained other men.
Two men went up into the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other a tax collector.
God, I thank thee that I am not as the rest of men, predatory, unjust, adulterers, or even as this tax collector.
I fast twice of the week. I tithe all things, as many as I acquire.
But the tax collector, having stood from afar, would not even lift his eyes to the sky, but beat upon his breast, saying, God, be thou merciful to me a sinful man.
I say to you, this man went down to his house justified rather than that man. Because every man who lifts himself up will be made lower, and he who makes himself lower will be lifted up.
And they were also bringing the infants to him, so that he would touch them, but when the disciples saw it, they rebuked them.
But having summoned them, Jesus said, Allow the children to come to me, and do not forbid them, for of such is the kingdom of God.
Truly I say to you, whoever will not receive the kingdom of God as a child, will, no, not enter into it.
And a certain ruler questioned him, saying, Good teacher, having done what, will I inherit eternal life?
And Jesus said to him, Why do thou call me good? None is good except one, God.
Thou know the commandments. Thou shall not commit adultery. Thou shall not murder. Thou shall not steal. Thou shall not give false testimony. Honor thy father and thy mother.
And he said, All these things I have kept from my youth.
And when he heard these things, Jesus said to him, Yet one thing is lacking from thee. Sell all things, as many as thou have, and distribute to the poor, and thou will have treasure in heaven. And come, follow me.
But when he heard these things, he became very sorrowful, for he was very rich.
And having seen him become very sorrowful, Jesus said, How difficultly those who have riches will enter into the kingdom of God.
For it is easier for a camel to enter in through the hole of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
And those who heard it said, And who can be saved?
And he said, The things impossible with men are possible with God.
And Peter said, Lo, we have left all and followed thee.
And he said to them, Truly I say to you, that there is no man who has left house, or parents, or brothers, or wife, or children for the sake of the kingdom of God,
who will, no, not receive back manifold more in this time, and in the coming age eternal life.
And having taken along the twelve, he said to them, Behold, we are going up to Jerusalem, and all the things that are written through the prophets about the Son of man will be completed.
For he will be delivered up to the Gentiles, and he will be mocked and insulted and spit upon.
And after scourging, they will kill him, and the third day he will rise up.
And they understood none of these things, and this saying was hidden from them, and they did not understand the things that were said.
And it came to pass as he approached Jericho, a certain blind man sat beside the road begging.
And having heard a multitude going by, he inquired what this may be.
And they informed him that Jesus the Nazarene passes by.
And he cried out, saying, Jesus, thou son of David, be merciful to me.
And those who went ahead rebuked him, so that he would be quiet, but he cried out much more, Thou son of David, be merciful to me.
And having stood still, Jesus commanded him to be brought to him. And when he came near, he questioned him,
saying, What do thou that I would do to thee? And he said, Lord, that I may receive sight.
And Jesus said to him, Receive sight. Thy faith has healed thee.
And immediately he received sight, and followed him glorifying God. And all the people when they saw it gave praise to God.

And having entered, he was passing through Jericho.
And behold, a man called by name, Zacchaeus. And he was a chief tax collector, and this man was rich.
And he sought to see Jesus, who he was. And he was not able because of the crowd, because his stature was small.
And having ran ahead, he climbed up in a sycamore tree so that he might see him, because he was going to pass that one.
And when Jesus came to the place, having looked up, he saw him, and said to him, Zacchaeus, after making haste, come down, for today I must lodge at thy house.
And having made haste, he came down and received him, rejoicing.
And all who saw murmured, saying, He went in to relax with a sinful man.
And having stood, Zacchaeus said to the Lord, Behold, half of the things possessed by me, Lord, I give to the poor. And if I defrauded any man of anything, I repay fourfold.
And Jesus said to him, Today salvation has come to this house, forasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham.
For the Son of man came to seek and to save that which was lost.
And as they heard these things, he spoke, adding on a parable because he was near Jerusalem, and because they thought that the kingdom of God was going to appear immediately.
He said therefore, A certain nobleman went into a far country to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return.
And having called ten of his bondmen, he gave them ten minas and said to them, Do business until I come.
But his citizens hated him, and sent an embassy behind him, saying, We do not want this man to reign over us.
And it came to pass for him to return, having taken the kingdom. And he said for these bondmen to be called to him, to whom he gave the silver, so that he might know what any man gained by trading.
And the first came, saying, Lord, thy mina gained ten minas.
And he said to him, Well, thou good bondman. Because thou became faithful in the least, be thou having authority over ten cities.
And the second came, saying, Lord, thy mina gained five minas.
And he also said to him, And thou become over five cities.
And another came, saying, Lord, behold thy mina, which I had put away in a napkin.
For I was afraid of thee because thou are an austere man. Thou take up what thou did not lay down, and reap what thou did not sow.
He says to him, Out of thy mouth I will judge thee, thou evil bondman. Thou had known that I am an austere man taking up what I did not lay down, and reaping what I did not sow.
Then why did thou not give my silver into a bank, and having come I would have collected it with interest?
And he said to those who stood by, Take the mina from him, and give it to him who has the ten minas.
And they said to him, Lord, he has ten minas.
For I say to you, that to every man who has, will be given, but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken away from him.
Nevertheless those enemies of mine who did not want me to reign over them, bring here, and kill them before me.
And having spoke these things, he went ahead, going up to Jerusalem.
And it came to pass when he came near to Bethphage and Bethany, at the mount that is called Olives, he sent two of his disciples, saying,
Go ye into the opposite village, in which, having entered, ye will find a colt tied, on which no man ever sat. Having untied, bring it.
And if any man asks you, Why do ye untie it? Thus ye will say to him, The Lord has need of it.
And having departed, those who were sent found just as he said to them.
And as they were untying the colt, the masters of it said to them, Why do ye untie the colt?
And they said, The Lord has need of it.
And they brought it to Jesus. And having cast their garments upon the colt, they mounted Jesus.
And as he went, they spread their garments on the road.
And as he was now coming near, at the descent of the mount of Olives, the whole multitude of the disciples began rejoicing to praise God in a great voice about all the mighty works that they had seen, saying,
Blessed is the King who comes in the name of the Lord! Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest!
And some of the Pharisees from the multitude said to him, Teacher, rebuke thy disciples.
And having answered, he said to them, I tell you that if these were silent, the stones would cry out.
And when he came near, having seen the city, he wept over it,
saying, If thou knew, even thou, indeed even in this thy day, the things for thy peace. But now they are hidden from thine eyes.
Because the days will come upon thee, and thine enemies will build a barricade around thee, and will surround thee, and enclose thee on every side.
And they will raze thee and thy children within thee. And they will not leave in thee a stone upon a stone, because thou knew not the time of thy visitation.
And having entered into the temple, he began to cast out those selling and buying in it,
saying to them, It is written, My house is a house of prayer, but ye made it a den of robbers.
And he was teaching daily in the temple. But the chief priests, and the scholars sought to destroy him, even the foremost men of the people.
And they did not find what they might do, for the people all hung upon him, listening.

And it came to pass on one of those days, as he was teaching the people in the temple, and preaching the good news, the chief priests and the scholars with the elders stood near.
And they spoke, saying to him, Tell us, by what authority are thou doing these things? Or who is he who gave thee this authority?
And having answered, he said to them, I also will ask you one word, and ye tell me.
The immersion of John, was it from heaven or from men?
And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we should say, From heaven, he will say, Why did ye not believe him?
But if we say, From men, all the people will stone us, for they are convinced John is a prophet.
And they replied not to know from where.
And Jesus said to them, Neither do I tell you by what authority I do these things.
And he began to speak this parable to the people. A man planted a vineyard, and leased it to farmers, and went abroad for a considerable time.
And at the season he sent a bondman to the farmers, so that they would give him from the fruit of the vineyard. But having beaten him, the farmers sent him away empty.
And he proceeded to send another bondman. And they, having beaten and shamefully treated, sent him also away empty.
And he proceeded to send a third. And they also having wounded this man, cast him out.
And the lord of the vineyard said, What shall I do? I will send my beloved son. Perhaps they will be made ashamed after seeing this man.
But when the farmers saw him, they deliberated among themselves, saying, This is the heir. Come, let us kill him, so that the inheritance may become ours.
And having cast him outside of the vineyard, they killed him. What therefore will the lord of the vineyard do to them?
He will come and destroy these farmers, and will give the vineyard to others. And having heard it, they said, May it not happen!
But having looked upon them, he said, What then is this that is written, The stone that those who build rejected, this became the head of the corner?
Every man who falls on that stone will be broken, but on whomever it may fall, it will grind him to dust.
And the chief priests and the scholars sought to throw hands on him in the same hour. And they were afraid, for they knew that he spoke this parable against them.
And having watched him, they sent forth insidious men pretending themselves to be righteous, so that they might take hold of his word, in order to deliver him up to the rule and to the authority of the governor.
And they questioned him, saying, Teacher, we know that thou speak and teach rightly, and thou do not accept a personage, but teach the way of God in truth,
Is it permitted for us to give tribute to Caesar or not?
But having perceived their craftiness, he said to them, Why do ye try me?
Display to me a denarius. Whose image and inscription has it? And having answered, they said, Caesar's.
And he said to them, Then render the things of Caesar to Caesar, and the things of God to God.
And they were unable to lay hold of his word before the people. And having marveled at his answer, they were silent.
And some of the Sadducees having approached, those who say there is no resurrection, they questioned him,
saying, Teacher, Moses wrote to us, if any brother dies, having a wife, and this man dies childless, that his brother should take his wife, and raise up seed to his brother.
There were therefore seven brothers. And the first having taken a wife, died childless.
And the second took the woman, and this man died childless.
And the third likewise took her, and likewise also the seven; they left behind no children, and died.
And last of all the woman also died.
In the resurrection therefore whose wife of them does she become? For the seven had her as wife.
And having answered, Jesus said to them, The sons of this age marry, and are given in marriage,
but those who are considered worthy to attain to that age, and the resurrection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in marriage.
For neither can they die any more, for they are like the agents, and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection.
But that the dead are raised, even Moses showed at the Bush when he calls the Lord, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
Now he is not God of the dead, but of the living, for all live to him.
And some of the scholars having answered, they said, Teacher, thou said well.
For they no longer dared to question him anything.
And he said to them, How do they say the Christ is David's son?
Even David himself says in the book of Psalms, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand,
until I will place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet.
David therefore calls him Lord, and how is he his son?
And while all the people were listening, he said to his disciples,
Beware of the scholars, who desire to walk around in long robes, and love greetings in the marketplaces, and chief seats in the synagogues, and places of honor at the feasts,
who devour widows' houses, and in pretence make long prayers. These will receive greater damnation.

And having looked up, he saw the rich casting their gifts into the treasury.
And he also saw a certain poor widow there casting in two mites.
And he said, Truly I say to you, that this poor widow cast in more than they all.
For all these cast into the offerings of God from their abundance, but this woman from her poverty cast in all the living that she had.
And as some spoke about the temple, that it was adorned with fine stones and gifts, he said,
These things that ye see, the days will come during which there will not be left a stone upon a stone that will not be thrown down.
And they questioned him, saying, Teacher, when therefore will these things be? And what is the sign when these things are going to happen?
And he said, Watch that ye may not be led astray, for many will come in my name, saying, I am, and, The time has come near. Go ye not therefore after them.
And when ye may hear of wars and tumults, do not be alarmed, for these things must first happen, but the end is not straightaway.
Then he said to them, Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
And great earthquakes will be in various places, and famines and plagues. And there will be fearful sights and great signs from the sky.
But before all these things, they will throw their hands on you, and will persecute you, delivering you up to the synagogues and prisons, being brought before kings and rulers for my name's sake.
But it will go out from you for testimony.
Settle therefore in your hearts not to premeditate to make defense.
For I will give you a mouth and wisdom that all those who oppose you will not be able to contradict or to resist.
And ye will be betrayed even by parents, and kinsmen, and friends, and brothers. And some of you they will condemn to death.
And ye will be hated by all men because of my name.
And, no, not a hair of your head will perish.
In your perseverance ye gain your souls.
But when ye see Jerusalem surrounded by armies, then know that the desolation of it has come near.
Then let those in Judea flee to the mountains, and let those in the midst of it depart out, and let not those in the rural areas enter into it.
Because these are days of vengeance to fulfill all things that are written.
But woe to those who have in the womb, and to those who suckle in those days. For there will be great distress upon the land, and wrath to this people.
And they will fall by the jaw of the sword, and will be led away captive into all the nations. And Jerusalem will be trampled down by the Gentiles until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
And there will be signs in sun and moon and stars, and upon the earth distress of nations, with perplexity, roaring of sea and of tossing,
fainting of men from fear, and of anticipation of the things coming upon the world, for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
And then they will see the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and much glory.
And when these things begin to happen, stand upright, and lift up your heads, because your redemption approaches.
And he spoke a parable to them. Behold the fig tree, and all the trees.
When they are now sprouting, ye know seeing for yourselves that summer is now near.
Even so ye, when ye see these things happening, know ye that the kingdom of God is near.
Truly I say to you, that this generation will, no, not pass away until all things happen.
The sky and the earth will pass away, but my words may, no, not pass away.
But take heed to yourselves, lest your hearts be weighed down in debauchery and drunkenness and mundane cares, and that day come upon you sudden.
For it will come like a trap upon all those who sit upon the face of all the earth.
Watch ye therefore, making supplication at all times, so that ye may be considered worthy to escape all these things going to happen, and to stand before the Son of man.
And during the days he was teaching in the temple, and going forth the nights, he lodged on the mount that is called Olives.
And all the people rose early in the morning to him in the temple to hear him.

Now the feast of unleavened bread was coming near, which is called Passover.
And the chief priests and the scholars sought how they might kill him, for they feared the people.
And Satan entered into Judas who was called Iscariot, being of the number of the twelve.
And having departed, he conversed with the chief priests and captains, how he might betray him to them.
And they were glad, and agreed together to give him silver.
And he consented and sought opportunity to betray him to them apart from the multitude.
And the day of unleavened bread came during which it was necessary to kill the Passover.
And he sent Peter and John, saying, After departing, prepare the Passover for us, that we may eat.
And they said to him, Where do thou want that we should prepare?
And he said to them, Behold, having entered into the city, a man will meet you carrying a pitcher of water. Follow him into the house where he enters.
And ye shall say to the house-ruler, The teacher says to thee, Where is the guest room where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?
And he will show you a large upper room furnished. Prepare there.
And having gone, they found just as he said to them, and they prepared the Passover.
And when the hour came, he sat down, and the twelve apostles with him.
And he said to them, With desire I have desired to eat this Passover with you before my suffering.
For I say to you, that I will eat of it no more, no, not till when it is fulfilled in the kingdom of God.
And having taken a cup, having expressed thanks, he said, Take this, and divide it among yourselves.
For I say to you, that I will, no, not drink from the fruit of the grapevine till when the kingdom of God comes.
And after taking bread, having expressed thanks, he broke in pieces, and gave to them, saying, This is my body that is given for you. Do ye this in my memory.
Likewise also the cup after dining, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood being shed for you.
Nevertheless behold, the hand of the man who betrays me is with me on the table.
And the Son of man indeed goes according to that which has been determined, nevertheless woe to that man through whom he is betrayed!
And they began to question among themselves who then of them would be going do this thing.
And also a dispute develop among them, which of them is considered to be greater.
And he said to them, The kings of the Gentiles have dominion over them, and those who exercise authority over them are called Benefactors.
But ye are not this way. Rather, the greater among you, shall become as the newer, and he who leads, as he who serves.
For who ranks higher, he who sits dining, or he who serves? Is it not he who sits dining? But I am in the midst of you as he who serves.
But ye are those who have continued with me in my trials.
And I appoint to you, just as my Father appointed to me a kingdom,
that ye may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom, and sit on thrones judging the twelve tribes of Israel.
And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan demanded to have you to sift you as wheat,
but I prayed for thee, so that thy faith may not fail. And thou, when thou have returned, strengthen thy brothers.
And he said to him, Lord, I am ready to go with thee both to prison and to death.
And he said, I say to thee, Peter, a cock will, no, not sound today, before thou will thrice deny that thou know me.
And he said to them, When I sent you without bag and pouch and shoes, did ye lack anything? And they said, Nothing.
Then he said to them, But now, he who has a bag, let him take it, and likewise a pouch. And he who has no sword, let him sell his cloak and buy.
For I say to you, that this that is written is still necessary to be completed in me, And he was counted with lawless men, for these things about me also have fulfillment.
And they said, Lord, behold, here are two swords. And he said to them, It is enough.
And having come out, he proceeded according to his habit to the mount of Olives, and his disciples also followed him.
And when he came at the place, he said to them, Pray ye not to enter into temptation.
And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's throw. And he knelt down and prayed,
saying, Father, if thou want, remove this cup from me. Nevertheless not my will, but thine be done.
And an agent from heaven appeared to him, strengthening him.
And having become in agony he prayed more intensely, and his sweat became like drops of blood falling down to the ground.
And after rising up from his prayer, having come to the disciples, he found them sleeping from sorrow.
And said to them, Why sleep ye? Having risen, pray that ye may not enter into temptation.
While he yet spoke, behold, a multitude, and the man called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them. And he came near to Jesus to kiss him.
But Jesus said to him, Judas, thou betray the Son of man with a kiss?
And when those who were around him saw what would be, they said, Lord, shall we strike with the sword?
And a certain one of them struck the bondman of the high priest, and cut off his right ear.
But having answered, Jesus said, Allow ye as far as this. And having touched his ear, he healed him.
And Jesus said to the chief priests, and captains of the temple, and elders, who came to him, Have ye come out, as against a robber, with swords and clubs?
When I was with you daily in the temple, ye did not stretch forth hands against me. But this is your hour, and the power of darkness.
And having seized him, they led him, and brought him into the high priest's house. But Peter followed from afar.
And having kindled a fire in the midst of the court, and having sat down together, Peter sat in the midst of them.
But a certain servant girl having seen him sitting near the light, and having looked intently upon him, she said, This man was also with him.
But he denied him, saying, Woman, I do not know him.
And after a little while, another man having see him, said, Thou also are from them. And Peter said, Man, I am not.
And about one hour having passed, some other man insisted, saying, In truth this man was also with him, for he is also a Galilean.
And Peter said, Man, I do not know what thou are saying. And immediately, while he still spoke, a cock sounded.
And having turned, the Lord looked on Peter. And Peter remembered the word of the Lord, how he said to him, Before a cock sounds thou will deny me thrice.
And having gone outside, Peter wept bitterly.
And the men who held Jesus mocked him, while striking him.
And having covered him, they struck his face, and demanded him, saying, Prophesy! Who is he who struck thee?
And they spoke many other things against him, railing against him.
And when it became day, the eldership of the people, the chief priests, and the scholars, came together, and led him into their council, saying,
If thou are the Christ, tell us. And he said to them, If I tell you, ye will not believe,
and if I also ask, ye will, no, not answer nor release.
From henceforth the Son of man will be sitting at the right hand of the power of God.
And they all said, Therefore thou are the Son of God? And he said to them, Ye say that I am.
And they said, What further need have we of testimony? For we have heard from his mouth.

And having risen, the whole company of them led him to Pilate.
And they began to accuse him, saying, We found this man perverting the nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, saying himself to be Christ, a king.
And Pilate questioned him, saying, Are thou the king of the Jews? And having answered him, he said, Thou say.
And Pilate said to the chief priests and the multitudes, I find nothing guilty in this man.
But they were emphatic, saying, He stirs up the people, teaching throughout all Judea, having begun from Galilee as far as here.
And when Pilate heard Galilee, he questioned if the man is a Galilean.
And when he perceived that he is from Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him to Herod, who was himself also in Jerusalem in these days.
Now when Herod saw Jesus, he was exceedingly glad, for he was wanting of a considerable time to see him, because of hearing many things about him, and he hoped to see some sign happening by him.
And he interrogated him in considerable words, but he answered him nothing.
And the chief priests and the scholars had stood, vehemently accusing him.
But Herod having disdained him with his soldiers, and having mocked him, having arraying him in a bright robe, he sent him back to Pilate.
And both Pilate and Herod became friends with each other on the same day, for they were formerly being at enmity toward themselves.
And Pilate having called together the chief priests, and the rulers, and the people,
said to them, Ye brought this man to me as turning away the people. And behold, I, having examined him before you, found nothing guilty in this man of what ye accuse against him.
But not even Herod, for I sent you back to him, and lo, nothing having been done by him is worthy of death.
Therefore, having scourged I will release him.
Now he had need to release one man to them at every feast.
But they cried out all together, saying, Take away this man, and release to us Barabbas
(a man who was cast into prison because of a certain insurrection that occurred in the city, and for murder).
Again therefore Pilate called out wanting to release Jesus,
but they shouted, saying, Crucify, crucify him.
And he said to them a third time, For what evil did this man do? I have found nothing guilty of death in him. I will therefore, having scourged, release him.
But they were relentless with loud voices demanding him to be crucified. And their voices and those of the chief priests prevailed.
And Pilate decreed their request to happen.
And he released the man who had been cast into prison because of insurrection and murder, whom they asked for, but he delivered Jesus to their will.
And when they led him away, having taken hold of a certain Simon, a Cyrenian coming from the countryside, they laid the cross on him to bring behind Jesus.
And a great multitude of the people followed him, and also of women who bewailed and lamented him.
But having turning to them, Jesus said, Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, instead weep for yourselves and for your children.
Because, behold, the days are coming, during which they will say, Blessed are the barren, and the bellies that gave no birth, and the breasts that did not suckle.
Then they will begin to say to the mountains, Fall on us, and to the hills, Cover us.
Because if they do these things in the green tree, what will happen in the dry?
And two other men, malefactors, were also led with him to be executed.
And when they came to the place called Skull, there they crucified him, and the malefactors, one at the right hand and the other at the left.
And Jesus said, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they are doing. And dividing his garments, they cast a lot.
And the people had stood watching. And also the rulers with them sneered, saying, He saved others. He should save himself, if this is the Christ, the chosen of God.
And the soldiers also mocked him, approaching, and bringing him vinegar,
and saying, If thou are the king of the Jews, save thyself.
THIS IS THE KING OF THE JEWS.
And one of the malefactors who were hanged railed him, saying, If thou are the Christ, save thyself and us.
But the other man having answered, rebuking him, saying, Thou fear not even God, since thou are in the same condemnation?
And we indeed justly, for we receive worthy of what we did, but this man did nothing amiss.
And he said to Jesus, Remember me, Lord, when thou come into thy kingdom.
And Jesus said to him, Truly I say to thee, today thou will be with me in the paradise.
And it was about the sixth hour, and darkness occurred over the whole land until the ninth hour.
And the sun was darkened, and the curtain of the temple was torn in the middle.
And Jesus, having sounded out in a great voice, said, Father, into thy hands I entrust my spirit. And having said these things, he expired.
And when the centurion saw that which happened, he glorified God, saying, Certainly this man was righteous.
And all the multitudes who came together to this scene, watching that which happened, turned back, beating their breasts.
And all his acquaintances, and the women who accompanied him from Galilee, had stood from afar, seeing these things.
And behold a man named Joseph, a council member, being a good and righteous man
(this man not having consented to their purpose and deed), was from Arimathaea, a city of the Jews, who also himself awaited the kingdom of God.
This man having gone to Pilate, requested the body of Jesus.
And having taken it down, he wrapped it in linen, and laid it in a sepulcher cut in rock, of which no man was yet lain.
And the day was Preparation; sabbath was beginning.
And having followed closely, the women who were gathered to him out of Galilee, they saw the sepulcher, and how his body was laid.
And having returned, they prepared spices and ointments. And they indeed rested on the sabbath according to the commandment.

And on the first day of the week, very early morning, they came to the sepulcher bringing the spices that they prepared, and some women with them.
And they found the stone rolled away from the sepulcher.
And having entered in, they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
And it came to pass while they were bewildered about this, that behold, two men stood near them in shining apparel.
And since they became frightened and bowing down their face to the ground, they said to them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?
He is not here, but was raised. Remember how he spoke to you when he was still in Galilee,
saying that the Son of man must be delivered up into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day to rise.
And they remembered his sayings.
And having returned from the sepulcher, they reported all these things to the eleven, and to all the others.
Now they were Mary Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James, and the other women with them who told these things to the apostles.
And their sayings appeared before them as idle talk, and they disbelieved them.
But having risen, Peter ran to the sepulcher. And having stooped down, he sees the linen cloths laying alone. And he departed, wondering to himself at that which happened.
And behold, two of them were going the same day to a village that was sixty furlongs away from Jerusalem, which name was Emmaus.
And they conversed with each other about all these things that happened.
And it came to pass, while they conversed and discussed, that Jesus himself also having approached, went along with them.
But their eyes were held, not to recognize him.
And he said to them, What are these words that ye toss back to each other, while walking and are looking sad.
And one, whose name was Cleopas, having answered, said to him, Thou only visit Jerusalem and do not know the things that happened in it during these days?
And he said to them, What? And they said to him, The things about Jesus the Nazarene, who became a prophet, a mighty man in work and word before God and all the people,
and how our chief priests and rulers delivered him up for condemnation of death, and crucified him.
But we hoped that he is the man who is going to redeem Israel. But even with all these things, it brings this third day today from which time these things happened.
But also some of our women astonished us, having come to be at the sepulcher early morning.
And not having found his body, they came, saying also to have seen a vision of agents who say he is alive.
And some of those with us went to the sepulcher, and found it this way, just as also the women said, but they did not see him.
And he said to them, O foolish men, and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets spoke.
Was it not necessary for the Christ to suffer these things, and to enter into his glory?
And having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he expounded to them in all the scriptures the things about himself.
And they came near to the village where they were going, and he pretended to go further.
And they constrained him, saying, Remain with us, because it is toward evening, and the day has declined. And he went in to remain with them.
And it came to pass during his dining with them, that, having taken the bread, he blessed, and having broken in pieces he gave to them.
And their eyes were opened, and they recognized him. And he became invisible from them.
And they said to each other, Was not our heart burning within us while he spoke to us on the way, while he opened to us the scriptures?
And having risen up the same hour, they returned to Jerusalem. And they found the eleven gathered together,
and those who were with them who said, The Lord really was raised, and was seen by Simon.
And they reported the things on the road, and how he was made known to them during the breaking of the bread.
And as they spoke these things, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and says to them, Peace to you.
But having been startled, and having become frightened, they presumed to see a spirit.
And he said to them, Why are ye troubled, and why do thoughts arise in your hearts?
See my hands and my feet, that it is I myself. Handle me and see, because a spirit does not have flesh and bones, as ye see me having.
And having said this, he displayed to them his hands and feet.
And while they still disbelieved from joy and wondering, he said to them, Have ye anything to eat here?
And they gave him a piece of a broiled fish and from a bees honeycomb.
And having taken it, he ate before them.
And he said to them, These are the words that I spoke to you while still being with you, that it is necessary for all things that are written in the law of Moses, and the prophets, and the psalms about me to be fulfilled.
Then he opened their mind to understand the scriptures.
And he said to them, Thus it is written, and thus it was necessary for the Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day,
and to proclaim in his name repentance and remission of sins for all the nations, having begun from Jerusalem.
And ye are witnesses of these things.
And behold, I send forth the promise of my Father upon you. But stay ye in the city until ye are clothed with power from on high.
And he led them outside as far as to Bethany, and having lifted up his hands, he blessed them.
And it came to pass while he blessed them, he parted from them, and was brought up into heaven.
And having worshiping him, they returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
and they were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. Truly.

John

In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
This man was in the beginning with God.
All things came to be through him, and apart from him not even one thing came to be that has come to be.
In him was life, and the life was the light of men.
And the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness did not comprehend it.
A man came to be who was sent from God, his name was John.
This man came for testimony so that he might testify about the light, so that all might believe through him.
That man was not the light, but that he might testify about the light.
He was the true light coming into the world that enlightens every man.
He was in the world, and the world came to be through him, and the world knew him not.
He came to his own, and his own did not accept him.
But as many as did accept him, to them he gave power to become children of God, to those who believe in his name,
who were begotten, not from blood, nor from a will of flesh, nor from a will of man, but from God.
And the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us. And we beheld his glory, glory as of the only begotten from the Father, full of grace and truth.
John testified about him, and cried out, saying, This was he of whom I said, He who comes after me came to be before me, because he was before me.
And from his fullness we all received, even grace for grace.
Because the law was given through Moses. Grace and truth came to be through Jesus Christ.
No man has ever seen God. The only begotten Son, being in the bosom of the Father, that man reported him.
And this is the testimony of John when the Jews sent forth priests and Levites from Jerusalem so that they might ask him, Who are thou?
And he confessed, and did not deny, and confessed, I am not the Christ.
And they asked him, What therefore, are thou Elijah? And he says, I am not. Are thou the prophet? And he answered, No.
They said therefore to him, Who are thou, so that we may give an answer to those who sent us? What do thou say about thyself?
Make straight the way of the Lord, just as the prophet Isaiah said.
And those who were sent were from the Pharisees.
And they asked him, and said to him, Why therefore do thou immerse if thou are not the Christ nor Elijah nor the prophet?
John answered them, saying, I immerse in water, but amidst you stands him whom ye know not.
He is the man who comes after me, who has become before me, of whom I am not worthy that I might loosen the strap of his shoe.
These things occurred in Bethany beyond the Jordan where John was immersing.
On the morrow John sees Jesus coming to him, and he says, Behold, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!
This is he about whom I said, After me comes a man who has become before me, because he was before me.
And I had not known him, but that he would be made known to Israel. Because of this I came immersing in water.
And John testified, saying, I have seen the Spirit descending like a dove out of heaven, and it remained upon him.
And I had not known him. But he who sent me to immerse in water, he said to me, Upon whomever thou will see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, this is he who immerses in the Holy Spirit.
And I have seen and have testified that this is the Son of God.
Again on the morrow John stood, and two of his disciples.
And having looked upon Jesus walking, he says, Behold, the Lamb of God!
And the two disciples heard him speaking, and they followed Jesus.
And Jesus having turned, and having seen them following, says to them, What seek ye? And they said to him, Rabbi (which says, being interpreted, Teacher), where do thou dwell?
He says to them, Come and see. They came and saw where he dwelt, and remained with him that day. It was about the tenth hour.
Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, was one of the two who heard from John and who followed him.
This man first finds his own brother Simon, and says to him, We have found the Messiah (which is, being interpreted, Christ).
And he brought him to Jesus. And having seen him, Jesus said, Thou are Simon the son of Jonah. Thou will be called Cephas (which is interpreted, Peter).
On the morrow he wanted to go forth into Galilee, and he finds Philip. And Jesus says to him, Follow me.
Now Philip was from Bethsaida, of the city of Andrew and Peter.
Jesus the son of Joseph of Nazareth.
And Nathanael said to him, What good can be from Nazareth? Philip says to him, Come and see.
Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and says about him, Behold, an Israelite indeed, in whom is no deceit.
Nathanael says to him, How do thou know me? Jesus answered and said to him, Before Philip called thee, being under the fig tree, I saw thee.
Nathanael answered, and says to him, Rabbi, thou are the Son of God. Thou are the king of Israel.
Jesus answered and said to him, Because I said to thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, thou believe? Thou will see greater than these things.
And he says to him, Truly, truly, I say to you, henceforth ye will see the heaven opened, and the agents of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.

And the third day a wedding occurred in Cana of Galilee, and the mother of Jesus was there.
And Jesus also was invited, and his disciples, to the wedding.
And having lacked wine the mother of Jesus says to him, They have no wine.
And Jesus says to her, What is with me and with thee, woman? My hour is not yet here.
His mother says to the helpers, Whatever he may say to you, do.
Now there were six stone water pots laying there in accordance with the purification of the Jews, containing two or three measures each.
Jesus says to them, Fill the water pots with water. And they filled them until over.
And he says to them, Draw out now, and carry to the feast-ruler. And they carried.
And when the feast-ruler tasted the water that became wine, and had not known from where it was (but the helpers who drew the water had known), the feast-ruler called the bridegroom,
and says to him, Every man sets out the good wine first, and when they drank much, then the lesser. Thou have kept the good wine until now.
This is the beginning of the signs Jesus did in Cana of Galilee, and he manifested his glory. And his disciples believed in him.
After this he went down to Capernaum, he and his mother and his brothers and his disciples. And they remained there not many days.
And the Passover of the Jews was near, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
And he found sitting in the temple those who sell oxen and sheep and doves, and the moneychangers.
And having made a whip from cords, he drove all out from the temple, both the sheep and the oxen. And he poured out the coins of the moneychangers, and turned over their tables.
And he said to those who sell the doves, Take these things from here. Make not my Father's house a house of merchandise.
And his disciples remembered that it is written, Zeal for thy house will consume me.
The Jews therefore answered, and said to him, What sign do thou show us since thou do these things?
Jesus answered and said to them, Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up.
The Jews therefore said, This temple was forty-six years being built, and will thou raise it up in three days?
But that man spoke about the temple of his body.
When therefore he was raised from the dead his disciples remembered that he spoke this, and they believed the scripture and the word that Jesus said.
Now when he was in Jerusalem at the Passover during the feast, many believed in his name seeing his signs that he did.
But Jesus did not trust himself to them, because he knew all men,
and because he had no need that any man should testify about man, for he himself knew what was in man.

Now there was a man of the Pharisees named Nicodemus, a ruler of the Jews.
This man came to him by night, and said to him, Rabbi, we know that thou have come a teacher from God, for no man can do these signs that thou do if God is not with him.
Jesus answered and said to him, Truly, truly, I say to thee, If any man is not begotten from above, he cannot see the kingdom of God.
Nicodemus says to him, How can a man be begotten, being old? Can he enter a second time into his mother's belly, and be born?
Jesus answered, Truly, truly, I say to thee, If any man is not begotten from water and Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God.
That which is begotten from the flesh is flesh, and that which is begotten from the Spirit is spirit.
Marvel not that I said to thee, ye must be begotten from above.
The wind blows where it will, and thou hear the sound of it, but know not from where it comes, and where it goes. So is every man who is begotten from the Spirit.
Nicodemus answered and said to him, How can these things happen?
Jesus answered and said to him, Thou are the teacher of Israel, and do not understand these things?
Truly, truly, I say to thee, we speak that which we know, and testify of what we have seen, and ye do not accept our testimony.
If I told you earthly things, and ye do not believe, how will ye believe if I should tell you heavenly things?
the Son of man who is in heaven.
And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of man be lifted up,
so that every man who believes in him would not perish, but may have eternal life.
For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, so that every man who believes in him would not perish, but have eternal life.
For God sent the Son into the world not that he might condemn the world, but that the world might be saved through him.
He who believes in him is not condemned. He who does not believe has been condemned already, because he has not believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God.
And this is the condemnation, that the light has come into the world, and men loved the darkness rather than the light, for their deeds were evil.
For every man who does evil hates the light, and does not come to the light, so that his works may not be exposed.
But he who does the truth comes to the light, so that his deeds may be made manifest that they are wrought in God.
After these things Jesus and his disciples came into the Judean country. And he remained there with them and immersed.
And John also was immersing in Aenon near Salim because there was much water there. And they came and were immersed.
For John was not yet cast into prison.
Therefore a debate developed from John's disciples with the Jews about purification.
And they came to John, and said to him, Rabbi, he who was with thee beyond the Jordan, about whom thou have testified, behold, this man immerses, and all men come to him.
John answered and said, A man can receive nothing unless it is given to him from heaven.
Ye yourselves testify that I said, I am not the Christ, but that I am sent ahead of that man.
He who has the bride is the bridegroom. But the friend of the bridegroom, who stands and hears him, rejoices with joy because of the bridegroom's voice. This therefore my joy is fulfilled.
It is necessary for that man to increase, but me to decrease.
He who comes from above is above all things. He who is of the earth is of the earth, and speaks of the earth. He who comes from heaven is above all things.
And what he has seen and heard, of this he testifies, and no man receives his testimony.
He who has received his testimony has set a seal that God is true.
For he whom God sent speaks the sayings of God, for God does not give the Spirit by measure.
The Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand.
He who believes in the Son has eternal life, but he who disobeys the Son will not see life, but the wrath of God remains on him.

When therefore the Lord knew that the Pharisees had heard that Jesus was making and immersing more disciples than John
(although Jesus himself did not immerse, but his disciples),
he left Judea, and departed into Galilee.
And it was necessary for him to pass through Samaria.
So he comes to a city of Samaria, called Sychar, near the place that Jacob gave to his son Joseph.
And Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore being wearied from the journey, thus was sitting on the well. It was about the sixth hour.
A woman of Samaria comes to draw water. Jesus says to her, Give me to drink.
For his disciples had gone away into the city so that they might buy food.
The Samaritan woman therefore says to him, How do thou, being Jewish, ask to drink from me, being a Samaritan woman, for Jews do not associate with Samaritans?
Jesus answered and said to her, If thou had known the gift of God, and who it is who says to thee, Give me to drink, thou would have asked him, and he would have given thee living water.
The woman says to him, Sir, thou have not even a container, and the well is deep. From where then have thou the living water?
Are thou greater than our father Jacob who gave us the well, and drank from it himself, and his sons, and his livestock?
Jesus answered and said to her, Every man who drinks of this water will thirst again,
but whoever drinks of the water that I will give him will, no, not thirst into the age. But the water that I will give him will become in him a well of water springing up to eternal life.
The woman says to him, Give me this water, sir, that I may not thirst, nor come here to draw out.
Jesus says to her, Go, call thy husband, and come here.
The woman answered and said to him, I have no husband. Jesus says to her, Thou said correctly, I have no husband.
For thou have had five husbands, and he whom thou now have is not thy husband. This thou have said true.
The woman says to him, Sir, I perceive that thou are a prophet.
Our fathers worshiped on this mountain, and ye say that in Jerusalem is the place where it is necessary to worship.
Jesus says to her, Woman, believe me, that the hour is coming when neither on this mountain, nor in Jerusalem will ye worship the Father.
Ye worship what ye do not know. We worship what we know, because salvation is from the Jews.
But an hour comes, and now is, when the true worshipers will worship the Father in spirit and truth, for also the Father seeks such kind who worship him.
God is Spirit, and those who worship him must worship in spirit and truth.
The woman says to him, I know that Messiah comes, he who is called Christ. When that man comes he will declare all things to us.
Jesus says to her, I who speak to thee am the man.
And upon this his disciples came. And they marveled that he spoke with the woman, yet no man said, What seek thou? or, Why do thou speak with her?
The woman therefore left her water pot, and departed into the city, and says to the men,
Come, see a man who told me all, as many things as I did. Is not this the Christ?
They went out of the city, and came to him.
In the meanwhile the disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, eat.
But he said to them, I have food to eat that ye know not.
The disciples therefore said to each other, Did any man bring him to eat?
Jesus says to them, My food is that I do the will of him who sent me, and may finish his work.
Do ye not say, There are still four months and the harvest comes? Behold, I say to you, lift up your eyes and see the fields, that they are already white for harvest.
And he who reaps receives a wage and gathers fruit for eternal life, so that both he who sows and he who reaps may rejoice together.
For in this the saying is true, One is who sows, and another who reaps.
I sent you to reap what ye have not labored. Others have labored, and ye have entered into their labor.
And many of the Samaritans from that city believed in him because of the word of the woman, who testified, He told me all, as many things as I did.
So when the Samaritans came to him they asked him to remain with them, and he remained there two days.
And many more believed because of his word.
And they said to the woman, We no longer believe because of thy speaking, for we have heard ourselves, and know that this really is the Savior of the world, the Christ.
And after the two days he departed from there and went into Galilee.
For Jesus himself testified that a prophet has no honor in his own fatherland.
So when he came into Galilee, the Galileans received him, having seen all the things that he did in Jerusalem at the feast, for they also went to the feast.
Jesus therefore came again to Cana of Galilee where he made the water wine. And there was a certain nobleman whose son was sick at Capernaum.
This man having heard that Jesus comes out of Judea into Galilee, he went to him and besought him that he would come down and heal his son, for he was going to die.
Jesus therefore said to him, Unless ye may see signs and wonders, ye will, no, not believe.
The nobleman says to him, Sir, come down before my child dies.
Jesus says to him, Go, thy son lives. And the man believed the word that Jesus said to him, and he departed.
And as he was now going down, his bondmen met him and reported, saying, Thy boy lives.
So he inquired of them the hour in which he fared well. And they said to him, Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him.
So the father knew that it was at that hour in which Jesus said to him, Thy son lives. And he himself believed and his whole house.
This again is a second sign that Jesus did, having come out of Judea into Galilee.

After these things there was a feast of the Jews, and Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
Now there is in Jerusalem by the place pertaining to sheep, a pool, which is called in Hebrew Bethesda, having five porches.
In these lay a great multitude of those who are feeble, blind, lame, withered, waiting for the movement of the water.
For an agent went down at a certain time into the pool, and agitated the water. Therefore the first man who stepped in after the agitation of the water became well from whatever affliction he had.
And a certain man was there who was thirty-eight years in the weakness.
When Jesus saw this man lying down, and knew that he fares now a long time, he says to him, Do thou desire to become well?
The infirmed man answered him, Sir, I have no man so that when the water is agitated he might put me into the pool, but while I am coming another steps down before me.
Jesus says to him, Arise, take up thy bed and walk.
And straightaway the man became well, and took up his bed and walked. Now it was sabbath on that day.
The Jews therefore said to the man who was cured, It is sabbath. It is not permitted for thee to take up the bed.
He answered them, The man who made me well, that man said to me, Take up thy bed and walk.
Therefore they asked him, Who is the man who said to thee, Take up thy bed and walk?
But the man who was healed had not known who he is, for Jesus withdrew, a multitude being in the place.
After these things Jesus finds him in the temple, and said to him, Behold, thou have become well. Sin no more, lest something worse may happen to thee.
The man departed and reported to the Jews that Jesus is the man who made him well.
And because of this the Jews persecuted Jesus, and sought to kill him, because he did these things on a sabbath.
But Jesus answered them, My Father works until now and I work.
Because of this therefore the Jews sought even more to kill him, because not only did he relax the sabbath, but also he called God his own Father, making himself equal to God.
Jesus therefore answered and said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, the Son can do nothing of himself, except what he sees the Father doing. For whatever he may do, the Son also does these things in like manner.
For the Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that he himself does. And he will show him works greater than these, so that ye may marvel.
For as the Father raises up the dead and makes alive, so also the Son makes alive whom he will.
For neither does the Father judge any man, but he has given all judgment to the Son,
so that all would honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. The man not honoring the Son, does not honor the Father who sent him.
Truly, truly, I say to you, that he who hears my word, and believes him who sent me, has eternal life. And he does not come into condemnation, but has passed from death into life.
Truly, truly, I say to you, that an hour comes, and now is, when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God, and those who hear will live.
For as the Father has life in himself, so also he gave to the Son to have life in himself.
And he also gave him authority to execute judgment because he is a son of man.
Marvel not at this, because an hour comes in which all those in the sepulchers will hear his voice,
and will come forth, those who have done right to a resurrection of life, and those who have practiced wrong to a resurrection of judgment.
I can from myself do nothing. As I hear, I judge. And my judgment is righteous because I seek not my will, but the will of the Father who sent me.
If I testify about myself, my witness is not valid.
There is another who testifies about me, and I know that the testimony that he testifies about me is valid.
Ye have sent to John, and he has testified to the truth.
But I do not take the testimony from man. However, I say these things, so that ye may be saved.
That man was the lamp that burns and shines, and ye were willing to rejoice for an hour in his light.
But I have testimony greater than of John, for the works that the Father has given me so that I might complete them, the same works that I do, they testify about me that the Father has sent me.
And the Father, he who sent me, has testified about me.Ye have neither heard his voice, nor have ever seen his appearance.
And ye have not his word dwelling in you, because ye do not believe that man whom he sent for this.
Ye search the scriptures, because ye think to have eternal life in them, and those are testifying about me.
And ye will not come to me, so that ye may have life.
I do not receive glory from men.
But I know you, that ye have not the love of God within yourselves.
I have come in my Father's name, and ye do not accept me. If another man should come in his own name, ye will accept that man.
How can ye believe, who receive glory from each other, and seek not the glory from the only God?
Think not that I will accuse you to the Father. The man who accuses you is Moses, in whom ye have hoped.
For if ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for that man wrote about me.
But if ye believe not the writings of that man, how will ye believe my sayings?

After these things Jesus went to the other side of the sea of Galilee of Tiberias.
And a great multitude followed him because they saw his signs, which he did on those who are infirmed.
And Jesus went up onto the mountain, and he sat there with his disciples.
Now the Passover, the feast of the Jews, was near.
Jesus therefore having lifted up his eyes, and having seen that a great multitude comes to him, he says to Philip, From where will we buy loaves, so that these may eat?
But he said this testing him, for he himself knew what he was going to do.
Philip answered him, Loaves of two hundred denarii of bread are not sufficient for them, so that each of them may take a little something.
One of his disciples, Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, says to him,
There is one child here that has five barley loaves and two fishes, but what are these for so many?
And Jesus said, Make the men sit down. Now there was much grass in the place. So the men sat down, in number about five thousand.
And Jesus took the loaves, and having expressed thanks, he distributed to the disciples, and the disciples to those who were sitting down, likewise also of the fishes as much as they wanted.
And when they were filled, he says to his disciples, Gather up the fragments that remain over, so that not anything may be lost.
So they gathered them up, and filled twelve baskets of fragments from the five barley loaves that remained over from those who have eaten.
When therefore the men saw what sign Jesus did, they said, This really is the prophet who comes into the world.
Jesus therefore having perceived that they are going to come and seize him, so that they might make him king, departed onto the mountain himself alone.
And when it became evening his disciples went down to the sea,
and having entered into the boat, they were going to the other side of the sea toward Capernaum. And it had already become dark, and Jesus had not come to them.
And the sea was being raised by a great wind blowing.
Therefore having impelled forward about twenty-five or thirty furlongs, they see Jesus walking on the sea, and coming near to the boat, and they were afraid.
But he says to them, It is I, fear not.
They were willing therefore to receive him into the boat, and straightaway the boat came to be at the land to which they were going.
On the morrow the multitude that stood on the other side of the sea, having seen that there was no other boat there except that one in which his disciples entered, and that Jesus did not go with his disciples into the boat, but his disciples went away alone,
and other boats came from Tiberias near the place where they ate the bread after the Lord expressed thanks,
when therefore the multitude saw that Jesus is not there, nor his disciples, they entered into the boats, and came to Capernaum seeking Jesus.
And when they found him on the other side of the sea, they said to him, Rabbi, when did thou become here?
Jesus answered them and said, Truly, truly, I say to you, ye seek me not because ye saw signs, but because ye ate of the loaves and were filled.
Work not for the food that perishes, but for the food that endures to eternal life, which the Son of man will give to you, for God the Father put a seal on this man.
They said to him therefore, What shall we do that we may work the works of God?
Jesus answered, and said to them, This is the work of God, that ye believe in that man whom he has sent.
They said to him therefore, What sign do thou, that we may see and believe in thee? What do thou work?
Our fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, just as it is written, He gave them bread out of heaven to eat.
Jesus therefore said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, Moses did not give you the bread out of heaven, but my Father gives you the true bread out of heaven.
For the bread of God is he who comes down out of heaven, and gives life to the world.
They said to him therefore, Lord, always give us this bread.
Jesus said to them, I am the bread of life. He who comes to me will, no, not hunger, and he who believes in me will, no, not ever thirst.
But also I said to you, that ye have seen me, and yet do not believe.
All that the Father gives me will come to me, and he who comes to me I will, no, not cast out.
Because I have come down from heaven, not so that I might do my will, but the will of him who sent me.
And this is the will of the Father who sent me, that of all that he has given me I would not lose from it, but I will raise it up at the last day.
And this is the will of him who sent me, that every man who sees the Son, and believes in him, may have eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
The Jews therefore murmured about him because he said, I am the bread that came down out of heaven.
And they said, Is this not Jesus, the son of Joseph, whose father and mother we know? Therefore how does this man say, I have come down out of heaven?
Jesus therefore answered and said to them, Murmur not among each other.
No man can come to me unless the Father who sent me draws him, and I will raise him up in the last day.
It is written in the prophets, And they will all be taught of God. Every man who hears from the Father, and having learned, comes to me.
Not that any man has seen the Father, except he who is from God. This man has seen the Father.
Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes in me has eternal life.
I am the bread of life.
Your fathers ate the manna in the wilderness, and they died.
This is the bread that comes down out of heaven, that a man may eat of it, and not die.
I am the living bread, having come down out of heaven. If any man eats of this bread, he will live into the age. And also, the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world.
The Jews therefore contended with each other, saying, How can this man give us his flesh to eat?
Jesus therefore said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, unless ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, ye have no life in yourselves.
He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has eternal life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
For my flesh is truly food, and my blood is truly drink.
He who eats my flesh and drinks my blood dwells in me, and I in him.
Just as the living Father sent me, and I live because of the Father, also he who eats me, that man will also live because of me.
This is the bread that came down out of heaven, not as your fathers ate the manna and died. He who eats this bread will live into the age.
He said these things in a synagogue, as he taught in Capernaum.
Therefore many of his disciples having heard, said, This is a hard saying. Who can listen to it?
But Jesus, knowing in himself that his disciples are grumbling about this, said to them, Does this cause you to stumble?
Then if ye should see the Son of man ascending where he was before?
It is the spirit that makes alive. The flesh benefits nothing. The sayings that I speak to you are spirit, are life.
Nevertheless, there are some of you who do not believe. For Jesus had known from the beginning who they are who do not believe, and who he is who will betray him.
And he said, Because of this I have said to you that no man is able to come to me, if it is not given to him from my Father.
From this, many of his disciples went back at these things, and walked no more with him.
Jesus said therefore to the twelve, Do ye not also want to go?
Simon Peter therefore answered him, Lord, to whom will we go? Thou have sayings of eternal life.
And we have believed and know that thou are the Christ, the Son of the living God.
Jesus answered them, Did I not choose you the twelve, and one of you is a devil?
But he spoke of Judas Iscariot son of Simon. For this man, being one of the twelve, was going to betray him.

And after these things Jesus walked in Galilee, for he did not want to walk in Judea, because the Jews sought to kill him.
Now the feast of the Jews, the feast of tabernacles, was near.
His brothers therefore said to him, Depart from here, and go into Judea so that thy disciples also may see thy works that thou do.
For no man does anything in secret, and he himself seeks to be in public. If thou do these things, show thyself to the world.
For not even his brothers believed in him.
Jesus therefore says to them, My time is not yet here, but your time is always ready.
The world cannot hate you, but it hates me because I testify about it, that its works are evil.
Go ye up to this feast. I am not yet going to this feast, because my time is not yet fulfilled.
And having said these things to them, he remained in Galilee.
But when his brothers went up, then he also went up to the feast, not openly, but as in private.
The Jews therefore sought him at the feast, and said, Where is that man?
And there was much murmuring among the multitudes about him. Some said, He is a good man, others said, No, but he leads the multitude astray.
Yet no man spoke openly about him because of fear of the Jews.
And when it was now in the middle of the feast, Jesus went up into the temple and taught.
The Jews therefore marveled, saying, How does this man know scholarly material, not having learned?
Jesus therefore answered them and said, My doctrine is not mine, but his who sent me.
If any man wants to do his will, he will know about the doctrine, whether it is from God, or I speak from myself.
He who speaks from himself seeks his own glory, but he who seeks the glory of him who sent him, this man is true, and unrighteousness is not in him.
Did not Moses give you the law, and none of you does the law? Why do ye seek to kill me?
The multitude answered and said, Thou have a demon. Who seeks to kill thee?
Jesus answered and said to them, I did one work, and ye all marvel because of this.
Moses has given you circumcision (not that it is from Moses, but from the fathers), and ye circumcise a man on a sabbath.
If a man receives circumcision on a sabbath, so that the law of Moses may not be loosed, are ye angry with me because I made a man entirely well on a sabbath?
Judge not according to appearance, but judge righteous judgment.
Therefore some of the Jerusalemites said, Is not this he whom they seek to kill?
And lo, he speaks in public, and they say nothing to him. Perhaps the rulers really know that this really is the Christ?
However we know this man, where he is from, but when the Christ comes, no man knows where he is from.
Jesus therefore cried out in the temple, teaching and saying, Ye both know me, and know where I am from? And I have not come of myself, but he who sent me is true, whom ye know not.
I know him, because I am from him, and he sent me.
They sought therefore to seize him, and yet no man laid a hand on him because his hour had not yet come.
But many from the crowd believed in him, and they said, When the Christ comes, will he do more signs than these that this man did?
The Pharisees heard the crowd murmuring these things about him, and the Pharisees and the chief priests sent subordinates so that they might take him.
Jesus therefore said, Yet a little time I am with you, and then I go to him who sent me.
Ye will seek me, and will not find me, and where I am, ye cannot come.
The Jews therefore said among themselves, Where is this man going to go that we will not find him? Is he going to go to the Dispersion among the Greeks, and teach the Greeks?
What is this word that he said, Ye will seek me, and will not find me, and, Where I am, ye cannot come?
Now on the last day, the great day of the feast, Jesus had stood and cried out, saying, If any man thirsts, let him come to me and drink.
He who believes in me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly will flow rivers of living water.
But he spoke this about the Spirit that those who believe in him were going to receive, for the Holy Spirit was not yet, because Jesus was not yet glorified.
Many from the multitude therefore, when they heard the saying, said, This is truly the prophet.
Others said, This is the Christ. Others said, For does the Christ come out of Galilee?
Has not the scripture said that the Christ comes of the seed of David, and from Bethlehem, the village where David was?
So there became a division among the multitude because of him.
And some of them wanted to take him, but no man laid hands on him.
The subordinates therefore came to the chief priests and Pharisees. And those men said to them, Why did ye not bring him?
The subordinates answered, A man never so spoke like this man.
The Pharisees therefore answered them, Have ye not also been led astray?
Have any of the rulers believed in him, or of the Pharisees?
But this multitude that does not know the law are accursed.
Nicodemus says to them (he who came to him by night, being one of them),
Does our law judge a man, unless it first may hear from himself and know what he does?
They answered and said to him, Are thou also from Galilee? Search and see, that out of Galilee arises no prophet.
And each man went to his house.

But Jesus went to the mount of Olives.
And at early morning he came again into the temple, and all the people came to him. And having sat down, he taught them.
And the scholars and the Pharisees bring to him a woman taken in adultery. And having stood her in the midst,
tempting, they say to him, Teacher, we found this woman committing adultery, in the act.
Now in the law, Moses commanded us such women are to be stoned. What therefore do thou say about her?
But they said this, trying him, so that they might have an accusation against him. But Jesus having stooped down, wrote on the ground with his finger, not pretending.
And when they continued asking him, after standing erect, he said to them, Let the innocent man of you first cast the stone at her.
And again having stooped down, he wrote on the ground.
And they, having heard and being convicted by their conscience, went out one by one, having begun from the elder until the last. And Jesus was left behind alone, and the woman being in the midst.
And Jesus, after standing erect, and having seen no man but the woman, he said to her, Woman, where are those accusers of thee? Did no man condemn thee?
And she said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said to her, Neither do I condemn thee. Go, and henceforth sin no more.
Again therefore Jesus spoke to them, saying, I am the light of the world. He who follows me would, no, not walk in the darkness, but will have the light of life.
The Pharisees therefore said to him, Thou testify about thyself. Thy testimony is not valid.
Jesus answered and said to them, Even if I might testify about myself, my testimony is valid, for I know where I came from and where I go, but ye do not know where I come from and where I go.
Ye judge according to the flesh. I judge no man.
But even if I judge, my judgment is valid, because I am not alone, but I and the Father who sent me.
And also it is written in your law that the testimony of two men is valid.
I am he who testifies about myself, and the Father who sent me testifies about me.
They said therefore to him, Where is thy Father? Jesus answered, Ye know neither me, nor my Father. If ye had known me, ye would have known my Father also.
Jesus spoke these sayings in the treasury as he taught in the temple, and no man seized him, because his hour had not yet come.
Jesus therefore again said to them, I go, and ye will seek me, and ye will die in your sin. Where I go, ye cannot come.
The Jews therefore said, Will he kill himself, because he says, Where I go, ye cannot come?
And he said to them, Ye are from below, I am from above. Ye are of this world, I am not of this world.
I said therefore to you that ye will die in your sins. For unless ye believe that I am he, ye will die in your sins.
They said therefore to him, Who are thou? And Jesus said to them, The beginning, something that I am even telling you.
I have many things to say and to judge about you. But he who sent me is true, and I speak to the world these things that I heard from him.
They did not understand that he spoke the Father to them.
Jesus therefore said to them, When ye have lifted up the Son of man, then ye will know that I am he, and I do nothing from myself, but I speak these things as my Father taught me.
And he who sent me is with me. The Father has not left me alone, because I always do things pleasing to him.
As he spoke these things of him, many believed in him.
Jesus therefore said to those Jews who believed him, If ye remain in my word, ye are truly my disciples,
and ye will know the truth, and the truth will make you free.
They answered to him, We are Abraham's seed, and have been in bondage to no man, ever. How can thou say, Ye will become free?
Jesus answered them, Truly, truly, I say to you, that every man who does the sin is a bondman of the sin.
And the bondman does not remain in the house into the age. The Son remains into the age.
If therefore the Son should make you free, ye will truly be free.
I know that ye are Abraham's seed, yet ye seek to kill me, because my word has no place in you.
I speak what I have seen from my Father, and ye therefore do what ye have seen from your father.
They answered and said to him, Abraham is our father. Jesus says to them, If ye were Abraham's children, ye would do the works of Abraham.
But now ye seek to kill me, a man who has told you the truth that I heard from God. Abraham did not do this.
Ye do the works of your father. They said therefore to him, We were not begotten from fornication. We have one Father, God.
Therefore Jesus said to them, If God were your Father, ye would love me, for I came forth and have come from God. For, neither have I come for myself, but he sent me.
Why do ye not understand my speech? Because ye cannot hear my word.
Ye are from the father, the devil, and ye want to do the desires of your father. He was a man-killer from the beginning, and he has not stood in the truth, because there is no truth in him. When he speaks a lie, he speaks from his own, because he is a liar, and the father of it.
And I, because I speak the truth, ye do not believe me.
Which of you convicts me about sin? And if I speak truth, why do ye not believe me?
He who is of God hears the sayings of God. Because of this ye do not hear, because ye are not of God.
Therefore the Jews answered and said to him, Do we not say well that thou are a Samaritan, and have a demon?
Jesus answered, I have no demon, but I honor my Father, and ye dishonor me.
But I seek not my own glory. He is who seeks and judges.
Truly, truly, I say to you, if any man keeps my word, he will, no, not see death, into the age.
The Jews therefore said to him, Now we know that thou have a demon. Abraham died, and the prophets, and thou say, If any man keeps my word, he will, no, not taste of death, into the age.
Are thou greater than our father Abraham who died? And the prophets died. Who do thou make thyself?
Jesus answered, If I glorify myself, my glory is nothing. My Father is he who glorifies me, of whom ye say, He is our God.
And ye do not know him, but I know him. And if I should say that I do not know him, I will be a liar like you, but I do know him and keep his word.
Your father Abraham rejoiced that he could see my day, and he saw it, and was glad.
The Jews therefore said to him, Thou have not yet fifty years, and thou have seen Abraham?
Jesus said to them, Truly, truly, I say to you, before Abraham came to be, I am.
Therefore they took up stones so that they might throw at him, but Jesus was hid, and went out of the temple, having passed through the midst of them, and thus passed on.

And as he passed on, he saw a man blind from birth.
And his disciples asked him, saying, Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents, that he would be born blind?
Jesus answered, Neither this man sinned, nor his parents, but that the works of God might be manifested in him.
I must work the works of him who sent me while it is day. Night comes when no man can work.
When I am in the world, I am the light of the world.
Having said these things, he spat toward the ground, and made clay of the spittle, and rubbed the clay on the eyes of the blind man.
And he said to him, Go, wash in the pool of Siloam (which is translated, He who has been sent). Therefore he went and washed, and came seeing.
The neighbors therefore and those who saw him formerly, that he was blind, said, Is this not he who sits and begs?
Others said, He is this man, but others said, He is like him. That man said, I am.
They said to him therefore, How were thine eyes opened?
That man answered and said, A man called Jesus made clay, and rubbed on my eyes, and said to me, Go to the pool of Siloam and wash. And after going and washing, I received sight.
Therefore they said to him, Where is that man? He says, I do not know.
They brought him to the Pharisees-the former blind man.
Now it was a sabbath when Jesus made the clay and opened his eyes.
Again therefore the Pharisees also asked him how he received sight. And he said to them, He put clay upon my eyes, and I washed, and I see.
Therefore some of the Pharisees said, This man is not from God, because he does not keep the sabbath. Other men said, How is a sinful man able to do such signs? And there was division among them.
They say again to the blind man, What do thou say about him, that he opened thine eyes? And he said, He is a prophet.
The Jews therefore did not believe about him, that he had been blind, and had received sight, until they called the parents of the man who had received sight.
And they asked them, saying, Is this your son, whom ye say that he was born blind? How then does he now see?
And his parents answered them and said, We know that this is our son, and that he was born blind,
but how he now sees, we know not. Or who opened his eyes, we know not. He has maturity, ask him. He will speak for himself.
His parents spoke these things because they feared the Jews, for the Jews had agreed already, that if any man confessed him as Christ, he should become excommunicated from the synagogue.
Because of this his parents said, He has maturity, ask him.
So they called the man who was blind, for a second time, and said to him, Give glory to God. We know that this man is sinful.
That man therefore answered and said, If he is sinful, I know not. One thing I know, that being blind, now I see.
But again they said to him, What did he do to thee? How did he open thine eyes?
He answered them, I told you already, and ye did not listen. Why do ye want to hear it again? Do ye not also want to become his disciples?
They reviled him, and said, Thou are a disciple of that man, but we are disciples of Moses.
We know that God has spoken to Moses, but this man, we know not where he is from.
The man answered and said to them, For in this it is amazing, that ye know not where he is from, and yet he opened my eyes.
And we know that God does not listen to sinners, but if any man is a worshiper of God, and does his will, he listens to this man.
From the age, it was not heard that any man opened the eyes of a man who was born blind.
If this man were not from God, he could do nothing.
They answered and said to him, Thou were born entirely in sins, and thou teach us? And they cast him outside.
Jesus heard that they cast him outside. And having found him, he said to him, Do thou believe in the Son of God?
That man answered and said, And who is he, Lord, that I may believe in him?
And Jesus said to him, Thou have both seen him, and he is that man who speaks with thee.
And he affirmed, Lord, I believe. And he worshiped him.
And Jesus said, For judgment I came into this world, so that those not seeing might see, and those who see might become blind.
And those of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and they said to him, Are we also blind?
Jesus said to them, If ye were blind, ye would have no sin, but now ye say, We see, therefore your sin remains.

Truly, truly, I say to you, he who does not enter in by the door into the fold of the sheep, but goes up some other way, that man is a thief and a robber.
But he who enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep.
The gatekeeper opens to this man. And the sheep hear his voice, and he calls his own sheep by name, and leads them out.
And when he puts forth his own sheep, he goes before them. And the sheep follow him because they know his voice.
And they will, no, not follow a stranger, but will flee from him, because they do not recognize the voice of strangers.
Jesus spoke this allegory to them, but those men did not understand what it was that he spoke to them.
Jesus therefore said to them again, Truly, truly, I say to you, that I am the door of the sheep.
All, as many as came before me are thieves and robbers, but the sheep did not hear them.
I am the door. If any man enters in by me, he will be saved, and will come in and go out, and will find pasture.
The thief comes not, except that he might steal and kill and destroy. I came so that they might have life, and have it more abundantly.
I am the good shepherd. The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
But the hired man, and not being the shepherd, whose sheep are not his own, sees the wolf coming, and leaves the sheep and flees. And the wolf catches them, and scatters the sheep.
But the hireling flees because he is a hireling, and it is no care to him about the sheep.
I am the good shepherd, and I know mine, and I am known by mine.
Just as the Father knows me, I also know the Father, and I lay down my life for the sheep.
And I have other sheep that are not of this fold. I must bring those also, and they will hear my voice. And there will become one flock, one shepherd.
Because of this the Father loves me, because I lay down my life, so that I may take it again.
No man takes it from me, but I lay it down by myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. I received this commandment from my Father.
Therefore again there became a division among the Jews because of these words.
And many of them said, He has a demon, and is mad. Why do ye listen to him?
Others said, These are not the sayings of a man possessed with a demon. Can a demon open the eyes of the blind?
And the feast of the dedication happened at Jerusalem, and it was winter.
And Jesus was walking in the temple in Solomon's porch.
The Jews therefore surrounded him, and said to him, When do thou lift up our soul? If thou are the Christ, tell us plainly.
Jesus answered them, I told you, and ye did not believe. The works that I do in my Father's name, these testify about me.
But ye do not believe, for ye are not of my sheep, as I said to you.
My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me.
And I give them eternal life, and they will, no, not perish into the age, and not any will snatch them out of my hand.
My Father who has given to me, is greater than all, and not one is able to snatch out of my Father's hand.
I and the Father are one.
Therefore again the Jews took up stones so that they might stone him.
Jesus answered them, I have shown you many good works from my Father. Because of them, which work do ye stone me?
The Jews answered him, saying, We stone thee not about a good work, but about blasphemy, and because thou, being a man, make thyself God.
Jesus answered them, Is it not written in your law, I said, ye are gods?
If he designated those men gods, for whom the word of God came to be (and the scripture cannot be broken),
whom the Father made holy and sent into the world, do ye say, Thou blaspheme, because I said, I am the Son of God?
If I am not doing the works of my Father, do not believe me.
But if I am doing them, even though ye do not believe me, believe the works, that ye may know and believe that the Father is in me, and I in him.
Therefore they sought again to take him, and he went forth out of their hand.
And he departed again beyond the Jordan into the place where John was first immersing, and he stayed there.
And many came to him, and they said, John indeed did not one sign, but all, as many things as John spoke about this man, were true.
And many believed in him there.

Now a certain Lazarus, from Bethany of the village of Mary and her sister Martha, was sick.
And Mary was the woman who anointed the Lord with ointment, and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick.
The sisters therefore sent to him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou love is sick.
But when Jesus heard, he said, This sickness is not about death, but for the glory of God, so that the Son of God may be glorified by it.
Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
When therefore he heard that he is sick, then he actually remained two days in that place he was.
Later after this he says to the disciples, Let us go into Judea again.
The disciples say to him, Rabbi, the Jews were now seeking to stone thee, and thou go there again.
Jesus answered, Are there not twelve hours in the day? If a man walks in the day, he does not stumble, because he sees the light of this world.
But if any man walks in the night, he stumbles, because the light is not in him.
He spoke these things, and after this he says to them, Our friend Lazarus has become asleep, but I go that I may awake him.
His disciples therefore said, Lord, if he has become asleep, he will be healed.
But Jesus had spoken about his death, but those men thought that he was speaking about the restfulness of sleep.
Therefore Jesus then said to them plainly, Lazarus died.
And I am glad for your sakes that I was not there, so that ye may believe. Nevertheless let us go to him.
Therefore Thomas, called Didymus, said to his fellow disciples, Let us also go, that we may die with him.
So when Jesus came, he found him already four days being kept in the sepulcher.
Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, about fifteen furlongs away from it,
and many of the Jews had come to the women, about Martha and Mary, so that they might console them about their brother.
Therefore Martha, when she heard that Jesus was coming, met him, but Mary was sitting in the house.
Martha therefore said to Jesus, Lord, if thou were here, my brother would not have died.
But I know even now that as many things as thou may ask of God, God will give to thee.
Jesus says to her, Thy brother will rise.
Martha says to him, I know that he will rise in the resurrection at the last day.
Jesus said to her, I am the resurrection and the life. He who believes in me, even though he died, he will live.
And every man who lives and believes in me will, no, not die, into the age. Do thou believe this?
She says to him, Yes, Lord, I have believed that thou are the Christ, the Son of God who comes into the world.
And when she said these things, she departed and called Mary her sister privately, saying, The teacher is here and calls thee.
When that woman heard, she rises quickly, and comes to him.
(Now Jesus had not yet come into the village, but was in the place where Martha met him.)
The Jews therefore being with her in the house and consoling her, having seen Mary, that she rose up quickly and went out, followed her, saying that she was going to the sepulcher that she may weep there.
Therefore when Mary came where Jesus was, after seeing him, she fell down at his feet, saying to him, Lord, if thou were here, my brother would not have died.
When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews who gathered with her, weeping, he groaned in the spirit, and was himself troubled.
And he said, Where have ye laid him? They said to him, Lord, come and see.
Jesus wept.
The Jews therefore said, Behold how he loved him.
But some of them said, This man who opened the eyes of the blind man, was he not also able to cause that this man also would not die?
Jesus therefore again groaning in himself comes to the sepulcher. Now it was a cave, and a stone lay against it.
Jesus says, Take ye away the stone. Martha, the sister of the man who came to end, says to him, Lord, he smells now, for it is the fourth day.
Jesus says to her, Did I not to say thee, that if thou believed, thou will see the glory of God?
So they took away the stone where the man who died was laying. And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou heard me.
And I had known that thou always hear me, but because of the multitude that stands by I spoke, so that they may believe that thou sent me.
And having said these things, he cried out with a great voice, Lazarus, come out.
And the man who died came forth, wrapped hands and feet with grave-clothes, and his face had been wrapped around with a face cloth. Jesus says to them, Loose him, and allow him to go.
Therefore many of the Jews who came to Mary, and who saw what Jesus did, believed in him.
But some of them went away to the Pharisees, and told them what things Jesus did.
Therefore the chief priests and the Pharisees gathered a council, and said, What are we doing? Because this man does many signs.
If we allow him this way, all men will believe in him, and the Romans will come and take away both our place and the nation.
And a certain one of them, Caiaphas, being high priest that year, said to them, Ye know nothing at all,
nor do ye consider that it is expedient for us that one man should die for the people, and not the whole nation should perish.
Now he said this not from himself, but being high priest that year, he prophesied that Jesus was going to die for the nation.
And not for the nation only, but also that he might gather together into one the children of God who are scattered abroad.
So from that day they consulted together so that they might kill him.
Jesus therefore no longer walked openly among the Jews, but departed from there into the region near the wilderness into a city called Ephraim, and he stayed there with his disciples.
Now the Passover of the Jews was near, and many went up to Jerusalem out of the countryside before the Passover, so that they might purify themselves.
Therefore they sought Jesus, and spoke with each other as they stood in the temple, What does it seem to you? That he will, no, not come to the feast?
Now also the chief priests and the Pharisees had given commandment, that if any man knew where he is, he should disclose it, so that they might take him.

Therefore six days before the Passover Jesus came to Bethany where Lazarus was, the man who died whom he raised from the dead.
So they made a supper for him there, and Martha served, and Lazarus was one of those who sat dining with him.
Mary therefore, after taking a pound of ointment of very costly genuine spikenard, anointed the feet of Jesus and wiped his feet with her hair. And the house was filled of the aroma of the ointment.
Therefore one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, son of Simon, the man who was going to betray him, says,
Why was this ointment not sold for three hundred denarii, and given to the poor?
Now he said this, not because it was a concern to him about the poor, but because he was a thief, and he had the purse and removed things that were put in.
Jesus therefore said, Let her alone. She has keep it for the day of my burial.
For ye always have the poor with you, but ye do not always have me.
Therefore a great multitude of the Jews knew that he is there. And they came, not only because of Jesus, but that they might also see Lazarus whom he had raised from the dead.
But the chief priests decided that they should kill Lazarus also,
since because of him many of the Jews were going and were believing in Jesus.
On the morrow a great multitude having come to the feast, when they heard that Jesus was coming to Jerusalem,
took the branches of the palm trees, and went forth to meet him, and cried out, Hosanna! Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel!
And Jesus, having found a young donkey, sat on it, as it is written,
Fear not, daughter of Zion. Behold, thy King comes, sitting on a donkey's colt.
Now his disciples did not understand these things at first, but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these were things written because of him, and they did these things to him.
Therefore the multitude, the one that was with him when he called Lazarus from the sepulcher, and raised him from the dead, testified.
Also because of this the multitude met him, because they heard of him doing this sign.
The Pharisees therefore said among themselves, Do ye see that ye accomplish nothing. Behold, the world has gone after him.
Now some Greeks were from those who came up so that they might worship at the feast.
These men therefore came to Philip, the man from Bethsaida of Galilee, and asked him, saying, Sir, we want to see Jesus.
Philip comes and tells Andrew, and again Andrew and Philip tell Jesus.
And Jesus answered them saying, The hour has come that the Son of man should be glorified.
Truly, truly, I say to you, unless the grain of wheat that falls into the ground dies, it remains alone, but if it dies it bears much fruit.
He who loves his life will lose it, and he who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.
If any man serves me, let him follow me, and where I am, there my helper will also be. And if any man serves me, the Father will honor him.
Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say? Father, save me from this hour. But because of this I came to this hour.
Father, glorify thy name. A voice therefore came out of heaven, saying, I both glorified it, and I will glorify again.
The multitude therefore that stood by and heard, said thunder occurred, others said, An agent has spoken to him.
Jesus answered and said, This voice occurred not for my sake, but for your sakes.
Now is the judgment of this world. Now the ruler of this world will be cast out.
And I, if I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw all men to myself.
And he said this, signifying by what death he was going to die.
The multitude answered him, We have heard from the law that the Christ remains into the age. And how can thou say, The Son of man must be lifted up? Who is this Son of man?
Jesus therefore said to them, Yet a little time the light is with you. Walk while ye have the light, so that darkness may not overcome you. And he who walks in the darkness knows not where he is going.
While ye have the light, believe in the light, so that ye may become sons of light. Jesus spoke these things, and after departing, he was hid from them.
But although having done so many signs before them, they did not believe in him,
Lord, who has believed our report? And to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?
Because of this they could not believe. Because Isaiah said again,
He has blinded their eyes, and has hardened their heart, so that they would not see with their eyes, and understand with their heart, and be turned, and I would heal them.
Isaiah said these things when he saw his glory, and spoke about him.
Yet, nevertheless, even many of the rulers believed in him, but because of the Pharisees they did not confess, so that they would not become excommunicated from the synagogue,
for they loved the praise of men more than the praise of God.
And Jesus cried out and said, He who believes in me, believes not in me, but in him who sent me.
And he who sees me sees him who sent me.
I have come a light into the world, so that every man who believes in me may not remain in the darkness.
And if any man hears my sayings, and will not believe, I do not judge him, for I came not so that I might judge the world, but that I might save the world.
the word that I spoke, that will judge him in the last day.
Because I spoke not from myself, but the Father who sent me, he gave me commandment, what I should say, and what I should speak.
And I know that his commandment is eternal life. Therefore what things I speak, just as the Father has said to me, so I speak.

Now before the feast of the Passover, Jesus, having seen that his hour has come that he would depart out of this world to his Father, having loved his own in the world, he loved them to the end.
And supper having occurred, the devil having now put into the heart of Judas Iscariot, Simon's son, that he would betray him,
Jesus, having seen that the Father has given all the things to him, into his hands, and that he came from God, and goes to God,
rises from supper, and set his garments aside, and after taking a towel, he girded himself.
Then he pours water into the wash-basin, and began to wash the disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel with which he was girded.
So he comes to Simon Peter, and that man says to him, Lord, do thou wash my feet?
Jesus answered and said to him, What I do thou do not know now, but thou will understand after these things.
Peter says to him, Thou may, no, not wash my feet into the age. Jesus answered him, If I may not wash thee, thou have no part with me.
Simon Peter says to him, Lord, not my feet only, but also my hands and head.
Jesus says to him, He who is bathed has no need to wash the feet either, but is entirely clean. And ye are clean, but not all.
For he knew the man betraying him. Because of this he said, Ye are not all clean.
When therefore he washed their feet, and took his garments, having sat down again, he said to them, Do ye understand what I have done to you?
Ye call me, Teacher, and, Lord. And ye say well, for I am.
If I then, the Lord and the teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash each other's feet.
For I have given you an example, so that just as I have done to you ye also should do.
Truly, truly, I say to you, a bondman is not greater than his lord, nor is an apostle greater than he who sent him.
If ye have seen these things, blessed are ye if ye do them.
I speak not about you all. I have seen whom I chose, but that the scripture may be fulfilled, He who eats bread with me lifted up his heel against me.
From henceforth I tell you before it happens, so that when it happens, ye may believe that I am.
Truly, truly, I say to you, he who receives any man whomever I may send, receives me, and he who receives me receives him who sent me.
Having said these things, Jesus was troubled in the spirit, and testified and said, Truly, truly, I say to you, that one of you will betray me.
Therefore the disciples looked at each other, being uncertain about whom he speaks.
And one of his disciples whom Jesus loved was sitting at Jesus' bosom.
Simon Peter therefore gestured to this man to inquire whoever he may be about whom he speaks.
And that man, having leaned thus toward Jesus' breast, says to him, Lord, who is he?
Jesus replies, He is that man to whom I, having dipped the morsel, will give. And when he dipped the morsel, he gives it to Judas Iscariot, the son of Simon.
And after the morsel, then Satan entered into that man. Jesus therefore says to him, What thou do, do more quickly.
But no man who was sitting knew why he said this to him.
For some thought, since Judas had the purse, that Jesus said to him, Buy what things we have need of for the feast, or that he should give something to the poor.
Therefore having received the morsel, straightaway that man went out, and it was night.
When he went out, Jesus says, Now the Son of man is glorified, and God is glorified in him.
If God is glorify in him, God will also glorify him in himself, and he will glorify him straightaway.
Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye will seek me, and as I said to the Jews, Where I go, ye cannot come, I also now say to you.
A new commandment I give to you, that ye should love each other, just as I loved you, so that ye also should love each other.
By this all men will know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love among each other.
Simon Peter says to him, Lord, where do thou go? Jesus answered him, Where I go, thou cannot follow me now, but thou will follow me afterwards.
Peter said to him, Lord, why cannot I follow thee now? I will lay down my life for thee.
Jesus answered him, Will thou lay down thy life for me? Truly, truly, I say to thee, A cock will, no, not sound, until thou will deny me thrice.

Let not your heart be troubled. Ye believe in God, believe also in me.
In my Father's house are many dwellings, and if not, I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you.
And if I go and prepare a place for you, I come again, and will take you along to myself, so that where I am, ye may be also.
And ye know where I go, and ye know the way.
Thomas says to him, Lord, we know not where thou go. How can we know the way?
Jesus says to him, I am the way, and the truth, and the life. No man comes to the Father, except by me.
If ye had known me, ye would have known my Father also. And from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him.
Philip says to him, Lord, show us the Father, and it is enough for us.
Jesus says to him, Have I been so long a time with you, and thou do not know me, Philip? He who has seen me has seen the Father. And how can thou say, Show us the Father?
Do thou not believe that I am in the Father, and the Father in me? The sayings that I speak to you I speak not from myself, but the Father who dwells in me, he does the works.
Believe me that I am in the Father, and the Father in me. But if not, believe me because of the works themselves.
Truly, truly, I say to you, he who believes in me, the works that I do, that man will also do. And he will do greater than these, because I go to the Father.
And anything whatever ye may ask in my name, this I will do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son.
If ye will ask me anything in my name, I will do it.
If ye love me, keep my commandments.
And I will ask the Father, and he will give you another helper, so that he may dwell with you into the age,
the Spirit of truth, which the world cannot receive, because it does not see nor know it. But ye know it, because it dwells with you, and will be in you.
I will not leave you orphaned. I am coming to you.
Yet a little while, and the world sees me no more, but ye see me. Because I live, ye will also live.
In that day ye will know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you.
He who has my commandments, and keeps them, that man it is who loves me. And he who loves me will be loved by my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him.
Judas (not Iscariot) says to him, Lord, and what has happened that thou are going to manifest thyself to us, and not to the world?
Jesus answered and said to him, If any man loves me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make a dwelling with him.
He who does not love me does not keep my words. And the word that ye hear is not mine, but the Father's who sent me.
I have spoken these things to you while remaining with you.
But the helper, the Holy Spirit that the Father will send in my name, he will teach you all things, and will remind you of all that I said to you.
Peace I leave with you. My peace I give to you, not as the world gives, do I give to you. Let not your heart be troubled, nor let it be cowardly.
Ye heard that I said to you, I go, and I come to you. If ye loved me, ye would have rejoiced because I said I go to the Father, because my Father is greater than I.
And now I have told you before it happens, so that when it happens, ye might believe.
I will no longer speak many things with you, for the ruler of the world comes. And he has nothing on me,
but that the world may know that I love the Father. And as the Father commanded me, thus I do. Arise, let us go from here.

I am the true grapevine, and my Father is the farmer.
Every branch in me not bearing fruit, he removes it. And every branch that bears fruit, he prunes it, so that it may bear more fruit.
Now ye are clean because of the word that I have spoken to you.
Dwell in me, and I in you. Just as the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, unless it dwells in the grapevine, so neither ye, if ye do not dwell in me.
I am the grapevine, ye are the branches. He who dwells in me, and I in him, this man bears much fruit, because without me ye can do nothing.
If any man does not dwell in me, he is cast out as a branch and is withered. And they gather them, and cast them into the fire, and are burned.
If ye dwell in me, and my sayings dwell in you, ye will ask whatever ye may want, and it will be done to you.
By this my Father is glorified, that ye may bear much fruit, and ye will become my disciples.
As the Father has loved me, I also have loved you. Dwell ye in my love.
If ye keep my commandments, ye will dwell in my love, just as I have kept my Father's commandments, and dwell in his love.
These things I have spoken to you that my joy may dwell in you, and your joy may be full.
This is my commandment, that ye love each other, just as I have loved you.
Greater love has no man than this, that some man lay down his life for his friends.
Ye are my friends, if ye do as many things as I command you.
I no longer call you bondmen, because the bondman does not know what his lord does. But I have called you friends, because all things that I heard from my Father, I made known to you.
Ye did not choose out me, but I chose out you, and appointed you, so that ye should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit may remain, so that anything whatever ye may ask of the Father in my name, he may give you.
These things I command you, so that ye may love each other.
If the world hates you, know that it has hated me before you.
If ye were of the world, the world would love its own, but because ye are not of the world (instead I chose you out of the world), because of this the world hates you.
Remember the word that I said to you, A bondman is not greater than his lord. If they persecuted me, they will persecute you also. If they kept my word, they will keep yours also.
But all these things they will do to you because of my name, because they have not known him who sent me.
If I had not come and spoken to them, they would not have had sin, but now they have no excuse for their sin.
He who hates me hates my Father also.
If I had not done among them the works that no other man has done, they would not have had sin, but now they have both seen and hated both me and my Father.
But, that the word that is written in their law may be fulfilled, They hated me without cause.
But when the helper comes whom I will send to you from the Father, the Spirit of truth that proceeds from the Father, that will testify about me.
And ye also testify, because ye have been with me from the beginning.

I have spoken these things to you, so that ye may not be caused to stumble.
They will make you excommunicated from the synagogues. But the hour comes that every man who kills you will presume to be offering service to God.
And they will do these things, because they have not known the Father nor me.
But I have told you these things, so that when the hour comes, ye may remember that I told you of them. But I did not tell you these things from the beginning because I was with you.
But now I go to him who sent me, and none of you asks me, Where do thou go?
But because I have spoken these things to you, sorrow has filled your heart.
Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I depart, for if I do not depart, the helper will not come to you. But whenever I go, I will send him to you.
And having come, that will convict the world about sin, and about justice, and about judgment.
About sin because they truly did not believe in me,
and about justice because I go to the Father, and ye see me no more,
and about judgment because the ruler of this world has been judged.
I have yet many things to say to you, but ye cannot bear them now.
However when that, the Spirit of truth, comes, he will guide you into all the truth. For he will not speak from himself, but as many things as he may hear, he will speak. And he will report to you the things that are coming.
He will glorify me because he will receive from me, and will report to you.
All things, as many as the Father has are mine. Because of this I said that he takes from me, and will report to you.
A little while, and ye do not see me. Again a little while, and ye will look at me, because I go to the Father.
Therefore some of his disciples said among themselves, What is this that he says to us, A little while, and ye do not see me, and, Again a little while, and ye will look at me, and, Because I go to the Father?
They said therefore What is this that he says, A little while? We know not what he says.
Therefore Jesus knew that they wanted to ask him, and he said to them, Do ye inquire among yourselves about this, because I said, A little while, and ye do not see me, and, Again a little while, and ye will look at me?
Truly, truly, I say to you, that ye will weep and lament, but the world will rejoice. Ye will be sorrowful, but your sorrow will become into joy.
When a woman brings forth she has pain because her hour has come. But when she has given birth to the child she no longer remembers the anguish because of the joy that a man was born into the world.
And now therefore indeed ye have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your heart will rejoice, and no man takes your joy away from you.
And in that day ye will ask me nothing. Truly, truly, I say to you, that as many things as ye may ask the Father in my name, he will give you.
Until now ye have asked nothing in my name. Ask, and ye will receive, so that your joy may be made full.
These things I have spoken to you in veiled words. The hour comes, when I will no more speak to you in veiled words, but will inform you plainly about the Father.
In that day ye will ask in my name, and I do not say to you, that I will pray the Father about you,
for the Father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came forth from God.
I came forth from the Father, and have come into the world. Again I leave the world, and go to the Father.
His disciples say to him, Lo, now thou speak plainly, and speak not one veiled word.
Now we know that thou know all things, and have no need that any man should question thee. By this we believe that thou came forth from God.
Jesus answered them, Do ye now believe?
Behold, the hour comes, and now has come, that ye will be scattered, each man to his own things, and ye will leave me alone. And yet I am not alone, because the Father is with me.
These things I have spoken to you, so that in me ye might have peace. In the world ye have tribulation. But cheer up, I have overcome the world.

Jesus spoke these things, and he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour has come. Glorify thy Son, that the Son may also glorify thee,
just as thou gave him authority over all flesh, so that all things that thou have given him, he will give them eternal life.
And this is eternal life, that they should know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou sent.
I glorified thee on the earth. I finished the work which thou have given me that I should do.
And now, Father, glorify thou me with thyself with the glory that I had with thee before the world was.
I manifested thy name to the men whom thou gave me out of the world. They were thine, and thou gave them to me, and they have kept thy word.
Now they know that all things, as many as thou gave me are from thee.
Because the sayings that thou gave to me, I gave to them. And they received them, and knew truly that I came forth from thee, and they believed that thou sent me.
I pray about them. I do not pray about the world, but about whom thou have given me, because they are for thee.
And all my things are thy things, and thy things are my things, and I am glorified in them.
And I am no more in the world, and these are in the world, and I come to thee. Holy Father, keep them in thy name that thou have given to me, so that they may be one, just as we.
While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name. Whom thou gave to me, I kept, and none of them was destroyed, except the son of destruction, so that the scripture might be fulfilled.
And now I come to thee. And I speak these things in the world, so that they may have my joy fulfilled in them.
I have given them thy word, and the world hated them, because they are not of the world, just as I am not of the world.
I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but that thou should keep them from the evil.
They are not of the world just as I am not of the world.
Sanctify them in thy truth. Thy word is truth.
Just as thou sent me into the world, so also I sent them into the world.
And for their sakes I sanctify myself, so that they may also themselves be sanctified in truth.
And I pray not about these only, but also about those who believe in me through their word,
so that they may all be one, just as thou, Father, are in me, and I in thee, that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that thou sent me.
And I, the glory that thou have given me, I have given to them, so that they may be one, just as we are one,
I in them, and thou in me, that they may be fully perfected in one, and so that the world may know that thou sent me, and loved them, just as thou loved me.
Father, whom thou gave to me, I desire that where I am, they also may be with me, so that they may see my glory that thou have given me, because thou loved me before the foundation of the world.
And righteous Father, the world does not know thee, but I know thee, and these know that thou sent me.
And I made known to them thy name, and I will make it known, so that the love that thou loved me may be in them, and I in them.

After speaking these things, Jesus went forth with his disciples on the other side of the brook Kidron, where there was a garden into which he entered, he and his disciples.
Now Judas, the man betraying him, had also known the place, because Jesus also often gathered there with his disciples.
Judas therefore having received the band and subordinates from the chief priests and the Pharisees, comes there with lanterns and torches and weapons.
Jesus therefore knowing all the things that were coming upon him, after going forth, he says to them, Whom seek ye?
They answered him, Jesus the Nazarene. Jesus says to them, I am he. And Judas, the man betraying him had also stood with them.
When therefore he said to them, I am he, they went backward and fell to the ground.
Again therefore he questioned them, Whom seek ye? And they said, Jesus the Nazarene.
Jesus answered, I told you that I am. If therefore ye seek me, allow these men to go,
so that the word that he spoke might be fulfilled, Of whom thou have given me, I lost, no, not one of them.
Simon Peter therefore, having a sword, drew it and struck the high priest's bondman, and cut off his right ear. Now the servant's name was Malchus.
Jesus therefore said to Peter, Put up thy sword into the sheath. The cup that the Father has given me, shall I, no, not drink it?
So the band, and the chief captain, and the subordinates of the Jews, arrested Jesus and bound him,
and led him away first to Annas. For he was father-in-law of Caiaphas, who was high priest that year.
Now Caiaphas was the man who counseled the Jews that it was expedient for one man to die on behalf of the people.
And Simon Peter followed Jesus, also the other disciple. But that disciple was known to the high priest, and he went in with Jesus into the courtyard of the high priest.
But Peter had stood near the door outside. So the other disciple, who was known to the high priest, went out and spoke to the doorkeeper and brought in Peter.
Therefore the servant girl (the doorkeeper) says to Peter, Are thou not also of this man's disciples? That man says, I am not.
Now the bondmen and the subordinates had stood, having made a fire of coals because it was cold, and they were warming themselves. And Peter was also standing with them warming himself.
The high priest therefore asked Jesus about his disciples, and about his doctrine.
Jesus answered him, I spoke in public to the world. I always taught in a synagogue, and in the temple where the Jews always gather together, and I spoke nothing in secret.
Why question thou me? Question those who have heard what I said to them. Behold, these know the things that I said.
And when he said these things, one of the subordinates standing by gave a slap to Jesus, saying, Answer thou the high priest this way?
Jesus answered him, If I spoke wrongly, testify about the wrong, but if correctly, why strike me?
Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.
Now Simon Peter was standing and warming himself. Therefore they said to him, Are thou not also of his disciples? That man therefore denied, and said, I am not.
One of the bondmen of the high priest, being a kinsman of him whose ear Peter cut off, says, Did I not see thee in the garden with him?
Peter therefore denied again, and straightaway a cock sounded.
They lead Jesus therefore from Caiaphas to the Praetorium. And it was early, and they did not enter into the Praetorium, so that they would not be defiled, but that they might eat the Passover.
Pilate therefore went out to them, and said, What accusation do ye bring against this man?
They answered and said to him, If this man were not an evildoer, we would not have delivered him up to thee.
Pilate therefore said to them, Take ye him, and judge him according to your law. The Jews therefore said to him, It is not permitted for us to kill any man,
so that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled that he spoke, signifying what kind of death he was going to die.
Pilate therefore again entered into the Praetorium, and called Jesus, and said to him, Are thou the king of the Jews?
Jesus answered, Do thou say this of thyself, or did others tell thee about me?
Pilate answered, Am I a Jew? Thine own nation and the chief priests delivered thee to me. What have thou done?
Jesus answered, My kingdom is not of this world. If my kingdom were of this world my subordinates would have fought so that I would not be delivered to the Jews, but now my kingdom is not from here.
Pilate therefore said to him, Then thou are a king? Jesus answered, Thou say that I am a king. For this I have been born, and for this I have come into the world, that I would testify to the truth. Every man who is of the truth hears my voice.
Pilate says to him, What is truth? And having said this, he went out again to the Jews, and says to them, I find not one cause in him.
But there is a custom for you that I should release to you one man at the Passover. Do ye wish therefore I would release to you the king of the Jews?
They all cried out again therefore, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas. But Barabbas was a robber.

Therefore Pilate then took Jesus and scourged him.
And the soldiers having woven a crown of thorns, they put it on his head, and put around him a purple garment.
And they said, Hail, king of the Jews! And they gave him slaps.
Therefore Pilate again went forth outside, and says to them, Behold, I bring him out to you, so that ye may know that I find not one cause in him.
Jesus therefore came outside, wearing the thorny crown and the purple robe. And he says to them, Look at the man!
When therefore the chief priests and the subordinates saw him, they cried out, saying, Crucify, crucify him! Pilate says to them, Ye take him and crucify, for I find no cause in him.
The Jews answered him, We have a law, and according to our law he ought to die because he made himself the Son of God.
When Pilate therefore heard this word, he was more afraid.
And he went into the Praetorium again, and says to Jesus, Where are thou from? But Jesus gave him no answer.
Pilate therefore says to him, Thou do not speak to me? Know thou not that I have authority to crucify thee, and I have authority to release thee?
Jesus answered him, Thou would have no authority against me, unless it were given thee from above. Because of this he who delivered me to thee has greater sin.
From this Pilate sought to release him, but the Jews cried out, saying, If thou release this man, thou are not Caesar's friend. Every man who makes himself a king speaks against Caesar.
When Pilate therefore heard this word, he brought Jesus out, and sat down on the judgment seat at a place called The Pavement, but in Hebrew, Gabbatha.
Now it was the Preparation of the Passover, and about the sixth hour. And he says to the Jews, Look at your king!
But they cried out, Away, away, crucify him! Pilate says to them, Shall I crucify your king? The chief priests answered, We have no king except Caesar.
Therefore he then delivered him to them, so that he might be crucified, and they took and led Jesus away.
And he went out bearing his cross to a place called, of a Skull, a place that is called in Hebrew, Golgotha,
where they crucified him, and two others with him, on this side and that, and Jesus in the middle.
And Pilate also wrote a title, and put it on the cross. And it was written, JESUS THE NAZARENE, THE KING OF THE JEWS.
Therefore many of the Jews read this title, because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city, and it was written in Hebrew, in Greek, in Latin.
Therefore the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate, Do not write, The king of the Jews, but, That man said I am king of the Jews.
Pilate answered, What I have written I have written.
The soldiers therefore when they crucified Jesus, took his garments and made four parts, to each soldier a part, and also the tunic. But the tunic was a seamless weave, from the top throughout.
They said therefore among themselves, Let us not divide it, but cast a lot for it, whose it will be, so that the scripture might be fulfilled, which says, They parted my garments among them, and for my clothing they cast a lot. Therefore the soldiers indeed did these things.
And his mother, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Cleopas, and Mary Magdalene had stood near the cross of Jesus.
When Jesus therefore saw his mother, and the disciple whom he loved standing by, he says to his mother, Woman, behold thy son.
Then he says to the disciple, Behold, thy mother. And from that hour the disciple took her to his own place.
After this, Jesus, having seen that all things are now completed, so that the scripture might be fully complete, says, I thirst.
Therefore a vessel full of vinegar was set there. And having filled a sponge with the vinegar, and having put it around a hyssop, they brought it to his mouth.
When therefore Jesus received the vinegar, he said, It is finished, and after bowing his head, he gave up the spirit.
The Jews therefore, so that the bodies would not remain on the cross on the sabbath, since it was Preparation (for it was the high day of that sabbath), they besought Pilate that their legs might be broken, and they might be removed.
The soldiers therefore came, and indeed broke the legs of the first, and of the other man who was crucified with him.
But having come to Jesus, when they saw him now having died, they did not break his legs.
But one of the soldiers pierced his side with a spear, and straightaway blood and water came out.
And he who has seen has testified, and his testimony is true. And that man knows that he speaks true, so that ye may believe.
For these things happened so that the scripture might be fulfilled, Not a bone of him will be broken.
And again another scripture says, They will look toward whom they pierced.
And after these things Joseph of Arimathaea, being a disciple of Jesus, but secretly because of fear of the Jews, besought Pilate that he might remove the body of Jesus, and Pilate allowed him. Therefore he came and removed the body of Jesus.
And Nicodemus also came (he who at the first came to Jesus by night) bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds.
So they took the body of Jesus, and wrapped it in linen cloths with the spices, just as is the custom of the Jews to bury.
Now a garden was in the place where he was crucified, and in the garden a new sepulcher in which no man was yet laid.
Therefore because of the Jews' Preparation (because the sepulcher was near) they laid Jesus there.

Now on the first day of the week Mary Magdalene comes early, while it was still darkness, to the sepulcher, and sees the stone taken away from the sepulcher.
Therefore she runs and comes to Simon Peter, and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and says to them, They have taken away the Lord out of the sepulcher, and we know not where they have laid him.
Peter therefore went forth, and the other disciple, and they went toward the sepulcher.
And the two men ran together, and the other disciple ran ahead quicker than Peter and came first to the sepulcher.
And after stooping down, he sees the linen cloths lying, yet he entered not.
Simon Peter therefore comes following him, and he entered into the sepulcher. And he sees the linen cloths lying,
and the face cloth that was on his head, not lying with the linen cloths, but wrapped up in one place separately.
Therefore then the other disciple who came first to the sepulcher, also entered in, and he saw and believed.
For they had not yet known the scripture that he must rise from the dead.
So the disciples departed again to themselves.
But Mary had stood outside near the sepulcher weeping. So, as she wept, she stooped down to the sepulcher.
And she sees two agents in white, sitting, one at the head and one at the feet, where the body of Jesus was lain.
And those men say to her, Woman, why weep thou? She says to them, Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.
And having said these things, she turned backward, and sees Jesus standing. And she had not known that it is Jesus.
Jesus says to her, Woman, why weep thou? Whom seek thou? That woman, supposing that he is the gardener, says to him, Sir, if thou have taken him, tell me where thou have laid him, and I will take him away.
Jesus says to her, Mary. After turning around, that woman says to him, Rabboni, which says, Teacher.
Jesus says to her, Do not touch me, for I have not yet ascended to my Father. But go to my brothers, and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and my God and your God.
Mary Magdalene comes informing the disciples that she has seen the Lord, and he spoke these things to her.
Therefore being evening that day, the first day of the week, and the doors having been shut where the disciples were who assembled because of fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst, and says to them, Peace to you.
And having said this, he showed them his hands and side. His disciples therefore rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
Jesus therefore said to them again, Peace to you. As the Father has sent me, I also send you.
And after saying this, he breathed on them, and says to them, Receive ye the Holy Spirit.
If ye forgive the sins of any, they are forgiven them. If ye retain of any, they are retained.
But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus came.
The other disciples therefore said to him, We have seen the Lord. But he said to them, Unless I may see the mark of the nails in his hands, and put my finger into the mark of the nails, and put my hand into his side, I will, no, not believe.
And after eight days his disciples were again inside, and Thomas with them. Jesus comes, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst, and said, Peace to you.
Then he says to Thomas, Bring thy finger here, and see my hands, and bring thy hand, and put into my side, and do not become faithless, but believing.
Thomas answered and said to him, My Lord and my God.
Jesus says to him, Because thou have seen me, thou have believed. Blessed are those who have not seen, and have believed.
And indeed therefore many other signs Jesus did in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book.
But these are written, so that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye may have life in his name.

After these things Jesus manifested himself again to his disciples at the sea of Tiberias. And he revealed himself this way.
There were together, Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other men of his disciples.
Simon Peter says to them, I am going to harvest fish. They say to him, We also go with thee. They went forth, and straightaway entered into the boat. And in that night they caught nothing.
But having now become morning, Jesus stood on the shore. However the disciples had not seen that it was Jesus.
Therefore Jesus says to them, Children, have ye anything eatable? They answered him, No.
And he said to them, Cast the net on the right side of the boat, and ye will find. Therefore they cast, and they were no longer able to draw it for the magnitude of fishes.
That disciple therefore whom Jesus loved says to Peter, It is the Lord. So when Simon Peter heard that it is the Lord, he tied the coat around himself (for he was undressed), and threw himself into the sea.
And the other disciples came in the skiff (for they were not far from the land, but about two hundred cubits off), dragging the net of the fishes.
So when they came to the land, they saw a fire of coals set, and fish laying on it, and bread.
Jesus says to them, Bring from the fishes that ye now caught.
Simon Peter went up, and drew the net to land, full of great fishes, a hundred and fifty-three. And being so many, the net was not broken.
Jesus says to them, Come, eat breakfast. And none of the disciples dared to query him, Who are thou? knowing that it is the Lord.
Jesus therefore comes, and takes the bread, and gives to them, and the fish likewise.
This is now a third time Jesus was manifested to his disciples after being raised from the dead.
So when they ate breakfast, Jesus says to Simon Peter, Simon, son of Jonah, do thou love me more than these things? He says to him, Yea, Lord. Thou know that I love thee. He says to him, Feed my lambs.
He says to him again a second time, Simon, son of Jonah, do thou love me? He says to him, Yea, Lord. Thou know that I love thee. He says to him, Feed my sheep.
He says to him the third time, Simon, son of Jonah, do thou love me? Peter was grieved because he said to him the third time, Do thou love me? And he said to him, Lord, thou know all things. Thou know that I love thee. Jesus says to him, Feed my sheep.
Truly, truly, I say to thee, When thou were younger, thou girded thyself, and walked where thou would, but when thou become old, thou will stretch forth thy hands, and another will gird thee, and carry thee where thou do not want.
Now he said this, signifying by what kind of death he will glorify God. And after saying this, he says to him, Follow me.
But Peter, having turned around, sees the disciple whom Jesus loves, following, who also leaned near his chest at the supper, and said, Lord, who is the man betraying thee?
Having seen this man, Peter says to Jesus, Lord, and what of this man?
Jesus says to him, If I want him to remain until I come, what is it to thee? Follow thou me.
This saying therefore went forth among the brothers, that that disciple does not die. And yet Jesus did not say to him, that he does not die, but, If I want him to remain until I come, what is it to thee?
This is the disciple who testifies about these things, and who wrote these things. And we know that his testimony is true.
And there are also many other things, as many as Jesus did, which if they would be written every one, I suppose not even the world itself to make room for the books being written. Truly.

Acts

I indeed made the former treatise, O Theophilus, about all things that Jesus began both to do and to teach,
until a day in which he was taken up, having commanded, through the Holy Spirit, the apostles whom he chose,
to whom he also presented himself living, after his suffering, by many infallible proofs, being seen by them during forty days, and speaking the things about the kingdom of God.
And being assembled together, he commanded them not to depart from Jerusalem, but to wait for the promise of the Father, Which, he said, ye heard from me.
Because John indeed immersed in water, but ye will be immersed in the Holy Spirit after not many of these days.
Indeed therefore having come together, they questioned him, saying, Lord, do thou restore the kingdom to Israel at this time?
And he said to them, It is not for you to know times or seasons, which the Father established in his own authority.
But ye will receive the power of the Holy Spirit that comes upon you. And ye will be witnesses to me both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea and Samaria, and as far as of the extremity of the earth.
And having said these things, as they were watching, he was taken up, and a cloud received him from their eyes.
And while they were gazing at his going into the sky, behold, two men had also stood by them in white apparel,
who also said, Men, Galileans, why stand ye gazing into the sky? This Jesus who was taken up from you into the sky will so come, in that same way as ye saw him going into the sky.
Then they returned to Jerusalem from the mountain called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem having a sabbath day journey.
And when they came in, they went up into the upper floor where they were lodging, including, Peter and James and John and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the son of Alphaeus, and Simon the Zealot, and Judas son of James.
All these men were continuing with one accord in prayer and supplication, with women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brothers.
And in those days, Peter, having stood up in the midst of the disciples (and there was a multitude of names at the same place, about a hundred twenty), he said,
Men, brothers, it was necessary for this scripture to be fulfilled, which the Holy Spirit foretold through the mouth of David about Judas, who became a guide to those who arrested Jesus,
because he was numbered with us, and received a share of this ministry.
(Indeed therefore this man obtained a field from the reward of his unrighteousness, and having become headlong, he burst open in the middle and all his bowels gushed out.
And it became known to all those dwelling at Jerusalem, so as to call that field in their own dialect, Akeldama, that is, The field of blood.)
For it is written in the book of Psalms, Let his habitation become desolate, and let no man be dwelling in it, and, Let another take his office.
It is necessary therefore, of the men who accompanied us during all the time during which the Lord Jesus went in and went out among us,
having begun from the immersion of John to the day that he was taken up from us, for one of these to become a witness with us of his resurrection.
And they put forward two, Joseph called Barsabbas, who was surnamed Justus, and Matthias.
And having prayed, they said, Thou, Lord, knowing the hearts of all men, show which one of these two thou have chosen
to take the place in this ministry and apostleship from which Judas transgressed to go to his own place.
And they gave their lots, and the lot fell upon Matthias, and he was numbered with the eleven apostles.

And while fulfilling the day of Pentecost, they were all together at the same place.
And suddenly there developed a sound from the sky as of a forceful wind moving, and it filled the entire house where they were sitting.
And there appeared to them dividing tongues, as of fire, and they settled upon each one of them.
And they were all filled of the Holy Spirit, and began to speak with other tongues, as the Spirit gave them to declare.
Now there were dwelling at Jerusalem, Jews, devout men from every nation under heaven.
And the sound of this that happened brought the multitude together. And it was bewildered because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
And they were amazed and marveled, saying to each other, Behold, are not all these men who speak Galileans?
And how do we each hear our own language in which we were born?
Parthians and Medes and Elamites, and those dwelling in Mesopotamia, and Judea and Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia,
and Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the parts of Libya along Cyrene, and those Roman aliens, including Jews and proselytes,
Cretes and Arabians. We hear them speaking in our tongues the great things of God.
And they were all amazed, and were perplexed, others saying to others, Whatever does this intend to be?
But others, mocking said, They are filled of wine.
But Peter having stood up with the eleven, raised his voice and spoke out to them, saying, Jewish men, and all who dwell at Jerusalem, be this known to you, and listen to my sayings.
For these men are not drunken, as ye suppose, for it is the third hour of the day.
And it will be in the last days, says God, I will pour out from my Spirit upon all flesh. And your sons and your daughters will prophesy, and your young men will see visions, and your elders will dream dreams.
And also on my bondmen and on my bondmaids in those days I will pour out from my Spirit, and they will prophesy.
And I will give wonders in the heaven above, and signs on the earth beneath, blood, and fire, and vapor of smoke.
The sun will be changed into darkness, and the moon into blood, before that great and wonderful day of the Lord comes.
And it will be, that every man, whoever may call on the name of the Lord will be saved.
Men, Israelites, hear ye these words. Jesus the Nazarene, a man shown by God among you by miracles and wonders and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, as ye yourselves also know,
this man, having been designated (by the purpose and foreknowledge of God) a man delivered up, ye, having taken by lawless hands, killed, having crucified,
whom God raised up, having loosed the pangs of death, because it was not possible for him to be held by it.
I beheld the Lord always before me, because he is at my right hand, so that I may not be moved.
Because of this my heart rejoiced, and my tongue was glad. And moreover my flesh will also rest in hope.
Because thou will not leave my soul in Hades, nor will thou give thy Holy man to see decay.
Thou made known to me the paths of life. Thou will fill me of joy with thy countenance.
Men, brothers, being permitted to speak to you with openness about the patriarch David, that he both perished and was buried, and his sepulcher is with us to this day.
Being therefore a prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, to raise the Christ from the fruit of his loins according to flesh to sit upon his throne.
Having foreseen this, he spoke about the resurrection of the Christ, that his soul was not left behind in Hades, nor did his flesh see decay.
This Jesus, God raised up, of which we are all witnesses.
Therefore, exalted by the right hand of God, and having received the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father, he poured out this that ye now see and hear.
For David did not ascend into the heavens, but he himself says, The Lord said to my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand
until I place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet.
Therefore let all the house of Israel know assuredly, that God has made him, this Jesus whom ye crucified, both Lord and Christ.
Now having heard this, they were pierced in the heart, and said to Peter and the other apostles, Men, brothers, what will we do?
And Peter said to them, Repent ye, and be immersed each of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
For the promise is to you, and to your children, and to all those in afar, as many as the Lord our God may call.
And with many more other words he testified and exhorted them, saying, Be saved from this crooked generation.
Indeed therefore those who received his word gladly, were immersed. And there were added in that day about three thousand souls.
And they were continuing steadfastly in the apostles doctrine, and in fellowship, and in the breaking of bread, and the prayers.
And fear developed in every soul. And many wonders and signs occurred through the apostles.
And all who believed were together, and had all things common.
And they sold properties and possessions, and divided them to all, according as any man had need.
And continuing steadfastly, daily with one accord in the temple, and breaking bread from house to house, they partook of nourishment in gladness and evenness of heart,
praising God, and having favor with the whole populace. And the Lord was adding to the church daily those being saved.

Now at the same time Peter and John were going up into the temple, at the hour of prayer, the ninth.
And a certain man, being lame from his mother's belly, was carried, whom they laid daily at the gate of the temple, called Beautiful, to ask charity from those who entered into the temple,
who, having seen Peter and John intending to go into the temple, asked charity.
And Peter, having gazed intently at him, with John, said, Look at us.
And he gave attention to them expecting to receive something from them.
But Peter said, No silver and gold exists to me, but what I have, this I give thee. In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, rise up and walk.
And after taking him by the right hand, he lifted him up. And immediately his feet and his ankles were strengthened.
And leaping up, he stood and walked. And he entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God.
And all the people saw him walking and praising God,
and they recognized him, that this was the man who sat for charity at the Beautiful Gate of the temple. And they were filled of astonishment and amazement at that which happened to him.
And as the lame man who was healed held Peter and John, all the people ran together to them in the porch that is called Solomon's, amazed.
And Peter having seen, he responded to the people, Men, Israelites, why do ye marvel at this man? Or why do ye stare at us, as by our own power or piety we have made him to walk?
The God of Abraham, and of Isaac, and of Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his Boy Jesus, whom ye actually delivered up, and denied him in the presence of Pilate who preferred to release that man.
But ye denied the Holy and Righteous, and asked for a man, a murderer to be granted to you.
And ye killed the Pathfinder of life, whom God raised from the dead, of which we are witnesses.
And by faith in his name, this man whom ye see and know, his name has made strong. And faith through him has given him this complete soundness in the presence of you all.
And now, brothers, I know that ye did it from ignorance, as also your rulers.
But this way God fulfilled what things were foretold, through the mouth of all his prophets, the Christ was to endure.
Repent ye therefore, and be converted in order to wipe away your sins, so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord.
And he may send Christ Jesus who has been pre-ordained for you,
whom heaven must indeed receive until the times of restoration of all things, of which God spoke through the mouth of all his holy prophets from the age.
For Moses indeed said to the fathers, The Lord our God will raise up a prophet for you, from your brothers, like me. Ye shall hear him in all things, as many as he might speak to you.
And every soul, whichever it will be, if it will not hear that prophet will be utterly destroyed from the people.
And also all the prophets from Samuel and those in succession, as many as spoke, also proclaimed these days.
Ye are sons of the prophets, and of the covenant that God made for our fathers, saying to Abraham, And in thy seed all the patriarchies of the earth will be blessed.
To you first, having raised up his Boy Jesus, God sent him blessing you, in turning away each man from your evils.

And as they spoke to the people, the priests and the captain of the temple and the Sadducees approached them,
being greatly annoyed because of their teaching the people, and proclaiming in Jesus the resurrection of the dead.
And they threw hands on them, and put them in custody for the morrow, for it was now evening.
But many of those who heard the word believed, and the number of the men became about five thousand.
And it came to pass on the morrow, to be assembled in Jerusalem, their rulers, and elders, and scholars,
and Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the high priestly family.
And after placing them in the midst, they inquired, By what power, or in what name, have ye done this?
Then Peter being filled with the Holy Spirit, said to them, Rulers of the people, and elders of Israel,
if we are examined today about a good deed, of a feeble man, by what this man has been healed,
be it known to you all, and to all the people of Israel, that in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the dead, by this, this man stands here before you healthy.
This is the stone that was rejected by you who build, which became into the head of the corner.
And salvation is not in any other man, for there is no other name under the heaven, that has been given among men, by which we must be saved.
Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John, and having perceived that they are illiterate and uneducated men, they marveled. And they recognized them, that they had been with Jesus.
And seeing the man who was healed standing with them, they had nothing to contradict.
But after commanding them to go outside of the council, they conferred among each other,
saying, What will we do to these men? For that indeed a notable sign has happened by them, is apparent to all who dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.
But that it may not spread on further among the people, let us threaten them with threats to speak no longer in this name, to not one man.
And having called them, they commanded them entirely, not to utter nor to teach in the name of Jesus.
But Peter and John having replied to them, they said, Whether it is right in the sight of God to hearken to you rather than God, judge ye.
For we are not able not to speak what we saw and heard.
And they, having further threatened, released them, finding nothing how they might punish them, because of the people. Since all glorified God for that which happened.
For the man was more than forty years old on whom this sign of healing had occurred.
And after being released, they went to their own men, and reported as many things as the chief priests and the elders said to them.
And those who heard lifted up a voice to God with one accord, and said, Thou Master, the God who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all things in them.
He who said through the mouth of thy boy David, Why do the nations rage, and the peoples meditate vain things?
The kings of the earth stood up, and the rulers were gathered together, against the Lord, and against his Christ.
For in truth, against thy holy Boy Jesus, whom thou anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the peoples of Israel, were gathered together,
to do as many things as thy hand and thy purpose predetermined to happen.
And now, Lord, look upon their threats, and grant to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word,
by thy stretching forth thy hand for healing, and signs and wonders to happen through the name of thy holy Boy Jesus.
And when they prayed, the place in which they were assembled was shaken, and they were all filled with the Holy Spirit, and they spoke the word of God with boldness.
And the multitude of those who believed were of one heart and soul. And not even one man said that anything of the things that was possessed by him was his own, but all things were common to them.
And with great power the apostles gave back the testimony of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, and great grace was upon them all.
For not even any needy was among them, for as many as were owners of lands or houses, selling, they brought the proceeds of the things that were sold,
and placed them at the apostles' feet. And it was distributed to each, according as any man had need.
And Joses, who was surnamed by the apostles, Barnabas (which is, being translated, son of encouragement), a Levite, a Cypriot by nationality,
having sold a field that was possessed by him, brought the money and placed it at the apostles' feet.

But a certain man named Ananias, with Sapphira his wife, sold property,
and kept back from the price, his wife also having joint awareness. And having brought a certain part, he placed it at the apostles' feet.
But Peter said, Ananias, why did Satan fill thy heart for thee to lie to the Holy Spirit, and to keep back from the price of the land?
While it remained, did it not remain to thee? And after it was sold, it was in thine authority. Why is it that thou have placed this matter in thy heart? Thou have not lied to men, but to God.
And Ananias hearing these words, after falling down he expired. And great fear developed in all who heard these things.
And after rising the young men wrapped him, and having carried him out they buried him.
And it came to pass after an interval of three hours, his wife also came in, not knowing that which happened.
And Peter responded to her, Tell me whether ye sold the land for so much. And she said, Yes, for so much.
But Peter said to her, How is it that it was agreed by you to challenge the Spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of those who buried thy husband are at the door, and they will carry thee out.
And immediately she fell down at his feet and expired. And after coming in the young men found her dead, and having carried her out, they buried her by her husband.
And great fear developed in the whole church, and in all who heard these things.
And by the hands of the apostles many signs and wonders happened among the people. And they were all with one accord in Solomon's porch.
But of the rest no man dared join them, but the people magnified them.
And more who believe were added to the Lord, multitudes both of men and women,
so as to bring the feeble to the thoroughfares, and to place them on cots and mats, so that while coming, the shadow of Peter might at the least overshadow some of them.
And also the populace of the cities round about came together to Jerusalem bringing the feeble, and those tormented by unclean spirits, who were all healed.
But after rising up, the high priest and all those with him (being the sect of the Sadducees) were filled of envy.
And they threw their hands on the apostles, and put them in the public prison.
But an agent of the Lord opened the prison doors by night, and after leading them out, he said,
Go ye, and after standing in the temple, speak to the people all the sayings of this Life.
And having heard, they entered into the temple at early morning, and taught. But the high priest having arrived, and those with him, they called the council together, and all the senate of the sons of Israel. And they sent to the prison for them to be brought.
But the subordinates who came did not find them in the prison. And having returned, they reported,
saying, We found the prison indeed shut in all security, and the guards standing before the doors, but after opening, we found no man inside.
Now when they heard these words, the high priest, and the captain of the temple, and the chief priests, were perplexed about them, whatever this would become.
But a certain man who arrived, reported to them, Behold, the men whom ye put in the prison are standing in the temple and teaching the people.
Then after departing, the captain with the subordinates brought them, not with violence, for they feared the people, lest they would be stoned.
And having brought them, they placed them in the council. And the high priest demanded them,
saying, Did we not command by an order for you not to teach in this name? And behold, ye have filled Jerusalem of your doctrine, and intend to bring upon us this man's blood.
And Peter and the apostles having answered, they said, We must obey God rather than men.
The God of our fathers raised up Jesus, whom ye murdered, having hung on a tree.
God exalted this man with his right hand, a Pathfinder and a Savior to give repentance to Israel and remission of sins.
And we are his witnesses of these things, and also the Holy Spirit whom God has given to those who obey him.
And when they heard this, they were as being split with a saw, and wanted to annihilate them.
But after standing up in the council, a certain Pharisee named Gamaliel, a law teacher, esteemed by all the people, commanded to make the apostles be outside a little while.
And he said to them, Men, Israelites, take heed to yourselves what ye are going to do against these men.
For before these days Theudas rose up saying himself to be somebody, to whom a number of men, about four hundred, bonded themselves, who was killed. And all, as many as were persuaded by him, were dispersed and developed into nothing.
After this man Judas the Galilean rose up in the days of the registration, and drew a considerable crowd behind him. That man was also destroyed, and all, as many as were persuaded by him, were scattered.
And now I say to you, keep away from these men, and let them go, because if the project or this work is from men, it will be overthrown,
but if it is from God, ye cannot overthrow it, and perhaps ye may be found to be fighting against God.
And they were persuaded by him. And after summoning the apostles, having beat them, they commanded them not to speak in the name of Jesus, and released them.
Indeed therefore they departed from the presence of the council, rejoicing that they were considered worthy to be treated shamefully for the name of Jesus.
And every day, in the temple and from house to house, they ceased not teaching and preaching good news, Jesus, the Christ.

Now in those days, the disciples being multiplied, there developed a murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews because their widows were neglected in the daily assistance.
And the twelve, having summoned the multitude of the disciples, they said, It is not right for us, having left the word of God behind, to serve tables.
Therefore, brothers, seek ye out seven men from you being well reported, full of the Holy Spirit and of wisdom, whom we may appoint over this need.
But we will continue steadfastly in prayer, and in the service of the word.
And the word was pleasing before all the multitude. And they chose Stephen, a man full of faith and of the Holy Spirit, and Philip, and Prochorus, and Nicanor, and Timon, and Parmenas, and Nicolas, a proselyte, a citizen of Antioch,
men whom they placed before the apostles. And having prayed, they laid hands upon them.
And the word of God increased, and the number of the disciples multiplied greatly in Jerusalem, and a large company of the priests were obedient to the faith.
And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and signs among the people.
But some of those from the synagogue called Libertines, and of the Cyrenians, and of the Alexandrians, and of those from Cilicia and Asia, rose up disputing with Stephen.
And they were not able to withstand the wisdom and the spirit by which he spoke.
Then they instigated men who said, We have heard him speaking blasphemous sayings against Moses and God.
And they incited the people, and the elders, and the scholars. And after approaching, they seized him, and brought him to the council.
And they put forward false witnesses who said, This man does not cease speaking blasphemous sayings against the holy place, and the law.
For we have heard him saying that this Jesus the Nazarene will destroy this place, and will change the customs that Moses delivered to us.
And all who sat in the council, having gazed upon him, saw his face like a face of an agent.

And the high priest said, Are these things so?
And he said, Men! Brothers and fathers, listen. The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Haran.
And he said to him, Go forth out of thy land, and from thy kinfolk, and come into a land that I will show thee.
Then after coming out of the land of the Chaldeans, he dwelt in Haran. And from there, after his father died, God resettled him in this land in which ye now dwell.
And he gave him no inheritance in it, not even a footstep. And he promised to give it to him for a possession, and to his seed after him, although there was no child by him.
His seed would be alien in a foreign land, and they would enslave and mistreat them four hundred years.
And I will judge the nation to whomever they will be in bondage, God said, and after these things they will come forth and serve me in this place.
And he gave him the covenant of circumcision. And so he begot Isaac, and circumcised him the eighth day. And Isaac begot Jacob, and Jacob the twelve patriarchs.
And the patriarchs, being envious, sold Joseph into Egypt. And God was with him,
and delivered him out of all his afflictions, and gave him favor and wisdom before Pharaoh king of Egypt. And he appointed him governor over Egypt and his entire house.
Now a famine came on all Egypt and Canaan, and great affliction, and our fathers found no sustenance.
But when Jacob heard of grain being in Egypt, he sent forth our fathers the first time.
And during the second time Joseph was made known to his brothers, and Joseph's race became manifest to Pharaoh.
And Joseph having sent forth, he summoned Jacob his father. And all his kinfolk, in souls, were seventy-five.
And Jacob went down into Egypt, and he perished, he and our fathers.
And they were carried into Shechem, and laid in the sepulcher that Abraham bought for a price of silver from the sons of Hamor of Shechem.
But as the time of the promise approached that God swore to Abraham, the people grew and multiplied in Egypt,
until another king arose who had not known Joseph.
This man, who cunningly victimized our race, mistreated our fathers to make their infants be placed outside in order not to keep alive.
During which time Moses was born (and he was well-formed by God) who was reared three months in his father's house.
And when he was exposed, Pharaoh's daughter took him away, and reared him for a son to herself.
And Moses was reared in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, and he was mighty in his words and deeds.
But when a forty year time span was fulfilled by him, it came into his heart to go help his brothers, the sons of Israel.
And after seeing a certain man suffering wrong, he defended him, and did vengeance for the man being oppressed, having smitten the Egyptian.
And he presumed his brothers understood that, by his hand, God was giving them salvation, but they did not understand.
And on the next day he was seen by them as they fought, and he was reconciling them for peace, having said, Men, ye are brothers. Why is it that ye wrong each other?
But the man doing wrong to his neighbor thrust him away, having said, Who appointed thee a ruler and a judge over us?
Do thou not want to kill me, as thou killed the Egyptian yesterday?
And Moses fled at this word, and became an alien in the land of Midian, where he begot two sons.
And forty years having been fulfilled, an agent of the Lord appeared to him in the wilderness of Mount Sinai in a flame of fire of a bush.
And when Moses looked, he wondered at the sight. And as he approached to examine, a voice of the Lord came to him,
I am the God of thy fathers, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. But Moses, who developed trembling, dared not examine.
And the Lord said to him, Put off the shoes from thy feet, for the place on which thou stand is holy ground.
Having looked, I saw the oppression of my people in Egypt, and I heard their groaning, and I came down to deliver them. And now come, I will send thee into Egypt.
This Moses whom they refused, having said, Who appointed thee a ruler and a judge? This man God sent, a ruler and a liberator by the hand of the agent who appeared to him in the bush.
This man brought them forth after performing wonders and signs in the land of Egypt, and in the Red Sea, and in the wilderness forty years.
This is the Moses who said to the sons of Israel, The Lord our God will raise up a prophet for you, from your brothers, like me.
This is he who became in the congregation in the wilderness with the agent who spoke to him on the mount Sinai, and of our fathers who received living oracles to give to us.
To whom our fathers did not want to become obedient, but they thrust away, and turned back in their heart to Egypt,
after saying to Aaron, Make gods for us who will lead us. For this Moses, who brought us out of the land of Egypt, we know not what has happened to him.
And they made a calf in those days, and offered up sacrifice to the idol, and rejoiced in the works of their hands.
But God turned, and gave them over to serve the host of heaven, just as it is written in the book of the prophets, Did ye offer to me slain beasts and sacrifices forty years in the wilderness, O house of Israel?
And ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch, and the star of your god Remphan, the images that ye made to worship them. And I will deport you beyond Babylon.
The tabernacle of the testimony was with our fathers in the wilderness, just as he arranged (he who spoke to Moses), to make it according to the pattern that he had seen.
Which also our fathers, having received in succession, brought in with Joshua into the possession of the nations whom God drove out from the presence of our fathers, until the days of David
who found favor in the sight of God. And he asked to find a habitation for the God of Jacob.
But Solomon built him a house.
However the Most High does not dwell in man-made temples, just as the prophet says,
The heaven is to me a throne, and the earth a footstool of my feet. What house will ye build for me? says the Lord. Or what is the place of my rest?
Did not my hand make all these things?
Ye stiff-necked and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the Holy Spirit. As your fathers, ye also.
Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute? And they killed those who foretold about the coming of the Righteous man, of whom ye now have become betrayers and murderers,
who received the law at directions of agents, and did not keep it.
Now when they heard these things, they were split with a saw in their hearts, and they gnashed their teeth against him.
But being full of the Holy Spirit, having gazed into heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
And he said, Look, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.
But they, having cried out in a great voice, held their ears shut, and rushed upon him with one accord.
And having expelled him out of the city, they stoned him. And the witnesses laid down their garments beside the feet of a young man called Saul.
And they stoned Stephen, who was calling and saying, Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.
And having knelt down, he cried out in a great voice, Lord, place not this sin to them. And after saying this, he slept.

And Saul was approving the killing of him. And on that day there developed a great persecution against the church at Jerusalem. And they were all scattered throughout the regions of Judea and Samaria, except the apostles.
And devout men arranged to bury Stephen, and they made great lamentation over him.
But Saul was ravaging the church, entering from house to house. Dragging both men and women, he gave them over to prison.
Indeed therefore those who were scattered abroad passed through proclaiming the good news, the word.
And Philip, who went down to a city of Samaria, proclaimed the Christ to them.
And the multitudes unanimously heeded the things that were spoken by Philip during their listening and seeing the signs that he did.
For of many of those who had unclean spirits, they came out, crying in a great voice. And many who were paralyzed, and who were lame, were healed.
And there became great joy in that city.
But a certain man in the city, Simon by name, was formerly practicing sorcery, and fascinating the nation of Samaria, saying himself to be some great man,
to whom they gave heed, from small to great, saying, This man is the great power of God.
And they heeded him, because he fascinated them for a considerable time with the sorceries.
But when they believed Philip preaching good news, the things about the kingdom of God and the name of Jesus Christ, they were immersed, both men and women.
And Simon himself also believed. And after being immersed, he was continuing with Philip. And seeing miracles and signs occurring, he was astonished.
Now when the apostles at Jerusalem heard that Samaria has received the word of God, they sent Peter and John to them,
who, when they came down, prayed for them, so that they might receive the Holy Spirit,
for it was not yet fallen upon any of them. They were only immersed in the name of the Christ Jesus.
Then they laid hands on them, and they received the Holy Spirit.
Now when Simon saw that the Holy Spirit was given through the laying on of the apostles' hands, he brought money to them,
saying, Give me also this power, so that on whomever I lay hands, he may receive the Holy Spirit.
But Peter said to him, Thy silver with thee, may it be for destruction, because thou thought to obtain the gift of God by money.
There is no part nor lot for thee in this matter, for thy heart is not straight in the sight of God.
Repent therefore from this thine evil, and beg God, if perhaps the thought of thy heart will be forgiven thee.
For I perceive that thou are in the gall of bitterness and the bond of unrighteousness.
And having answered, Simon said, Beg ye to the Lord for me, so that none of which things ye have spoken may come upon me.
Indeed therefore, having solemnly testified and spoken the word of the Lord, they returned to Jerusalem, and preached the good news in many villages of the Samaritans.
And an agent of the Lord spoke to Philip, saying, Arise, and go toward the south to the road that goes down from Jerusalem to Gaza. This is a desolate region.
And after rising, he went. And behold a man, an Ethiopian, a eunuch, a high official of Candace the queen of the Ethiopians, who was over all her treasure, who had come to Jerusalem to worship.
And he was returning, and sitting in his chariot, and reading the prophet Isaiah.
And the Spirit said to Philip, Go near, and be joined to this chariot.
And after running near, Philip heard him reading the prophet Isaiah. And he said, Do thou also really understand the things that thou read?
And he said, For how can I unless some man may guide me? And he encouraged Philip, after coming up, to sit with him.
He was led as a sheep to slaughter, and as a lamb, mute before shearing him, thus he opened not his mouth.
In his lowly condition his justice was taken away. And who will describe his generation, because his life was taken from the earth?
And having answered, the eunuch said to Philip, I ask thee, about whom does the prophet say this, about himself, or about some other man?
And Philip having opened his mouth, and having begun from this scripture, he preached the good news to him-the man Jesus.
And as they went on the way, they came to some water, and the eunuch says, Look, water! What prevents me to be immersed?
[This verse in not in the majority of the Greek manuscripts.]
And he commanded the chariot to stand still. And they both went down into the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he immersed him.
And when they came up out of the water, Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no more, for he went on his way rejoicing.
But Philip was found at Azotus. And passing through all the cities he preached the good news until he came to Caesarea.

But Saul, still breathing threat and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, after going to the high priest,
he requested letters from him for Damascus, to the synagogues, so that if he found any who were of the Way, both men and women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem.
And on going, it came to pass for him to approach Damascus. And suddenly there shone around him a light out of heaven.
And after falling to the ground, he heard a voice saying to him, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me?
And he said, Who are thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecute.
But arise, and enter into the city, and it will be told thee what thou must do.
And the men who traveled with him had stopped, speechless, indeed hearing the voice, but seeing no man.
And Saul arose from the ground. And when his eyes were opened, he saw no man. But they brought him into Damascus, leading him by the hand.
And he was three days not seeing, and did not eat or drink.
Now there was a certain disciple in Damascus, named Ananias, and the Lord said to him in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold me, Lord.
And the Lord said to him, After rising, go into the street called Straight, and seek in the house of Judas, a man named Saul of Tarsus, for behold, he is praying.
And he saw in a vision a man named Ananias who came in and laid a hand on him, so that he might receive sight.
But Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard from many about this man, how many evil things he did to thy sanctified at Jerusalem.
And here he has authority from the chief priests to bind all who call upon thy name.
But the Lord said to him, Go, because this man is a chosen vessel to me, to bear my name before Gentiles and kings, and sons of Israel.
For I will give him a glimpse of how many things it is necessary for him to suffer for my name.
And Ananias departed and entered into the house. And having laid hands on him he said, Brother Saul, the Lord, he who appeared to thee on the road on which thou came, has sent me so that thou may receive sight, and be filled of the Holy Spirit.
And straightaway there fell from his eyes, like scales, and he looked up. And immediately after rising up, he was immersed.
And having received nourishment, he was strengthened. And Saul became with the disciples in Damascus some days.
And straightaway he proclaimed the Christ in the synagogues, that this man is the Son of God.
And all those who heard were amazed, and said, Is this not the man who destroyed those in Jerusalem who call on this name? And he has come here for this, so that he might bring them bound to the chief priests.
But Saul was strengthened more, and was confounding the Jews who dwell at Damascus, proving that this is the Christ.
And after considerable days were fulfilled, the Jews plotted to destroy him,
but their plot was known to Saul. And they watched the gates both day and night so that they might destroy him.
But the disciples, after taking him by night, let him down through the wall, having lowered him in a hamper.
And when Saul arrived in Jerusalem, he attempted to join with the disciples, and they all feared him, not believing that he is a disciple.
But Barnabas having taken him, he brought him to the apostles. And he related to them how he saw the Lord on the road, and that he spoke to him, and how he spoke boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus.
And he was with them coming in and going out at Jerusalem, and speaking boldly in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And he spoke and disputed against the Hellenists, but they attempted to destroy him.
But when the brothers knew it, they brought him down to Caesarea, and sent him away to Tarsus.
Indeed therefore the congregations throughout the whole of Judea and Galilee and Samaria had peace, being edified. And, going in the fear of the Lord and in the encouragement of the Holy Spirit, they were multiplied.
And it came to pass, Peter, passing through all parts, to also come down to the sanctified who dwell at Lydda.
And he found there a certain man named Aeneas, who was paralyzed, laying on a bed for eight years.
And Peter said to him, Aeneas, Jesus the Christ heals thee. Arise and make thy bed. And straightaway he arose.
And all those dwelling at Lydda and Sharon who saw him, turned to the Lord.
Now at Joppa there was a certain disciple named Tabitha, which, being translated, is called Dorcas. This woman was full of good works and charities that she did.
And in those days, having been ill, she happened to die. And after washing her, they laid her in an upper chamber.
And since Lydda is near Joppa, the disciples, having heard that Peter is in it, they sent two men to him, exhorting him not to delay to go through to them.
And after rising, Peter went with them, whom, after coming, they brought into the upper chamber. And all the widows stood by him weeping, and exhibiting the coats and garments, as many things as Dorcas made being with them.
But Peter, having sent them all out, having knelt down, he prayed. And having turned to the body, he said, Tabitha, arise. And the woman opened her eyes. And when she saw Peter, she sat up.
And having given her a hand, he raised her up. And after calling the sanctified and the widows, he presented her alive.
And it became known throughout the whole of Joppa, and many believed in the Lord.
And it came to pass for him to remain considerable days at Joppa with a certain Simon, a tanner.

Now a certain man was in Caesarea, Cornelius by name, a centurion of the band called Italian,
a devout man, and fearing God with all his house, and doing many charities for the people, and beseeching God always.
He saw plainly in a vision about the ninth hour of the day, an agent of God coming in to him, and saying to him, Cornelius.
And after gazing at him, and having become afraid, he said, What is it, Lord? And he said to him, Thy prayers and thy charities have come up for a memorial before God.
And now send men to Joppa and summon Simon, who is surnamed Peter.
This man lodges with a certain Simon, a tanner, whose house is beside the seaside.
And when the agent speaking to Cornelius departed, having called two of his housemen, and a devout soldier of those who personally served him,
and after reporting all things to them, he sent them to Joppa.
Now on the morrow, while those men were traveling and approaching the city, Peter went up upon the housetop to pray, about the sixth hour.
And he became very hungry and wanted to eat. But while those men prepared, a trance fell upon him.
And he sees heaven opened, and a certain container descending to him, like a great sheet bound at four corners, and being lowered to the earth,
in which were all the four-footed things of the earth, and the wild beasts, and the creeping things, and the birds of the sky.
And a voice came to him, After rising, Peter, kill and eat.
But Peter said, Not so, Lord, because I have never eaten anything profane or unclean.
And a voice again for a second time, What God has cleansed, thou shall not make profane.
And this happened thrice, and again the vessel was taken up into heaven.
Now while Peter was bewildered in himself whatever the vision which he saw might be, that lo, the men who were sent from Cornelius, having inquired the house of Simon, stood at the gate.
And after calling out they asked whether Simon, who was surnamed Peter, lodges here.
And while Peter thought about the vision, the Spirit said to him, Behold, men seek thee.
But after rising, go down, and go with them, doubting nothing, because I have sent them.
And having gone down to the men, Peter said, Behold, I am he whom ye seek. What is the cause for which ye are here?
And they said, Cornelius, a centurion, a righteous man, and fearing God, and being well testified by the whole nation of the Jews, was divinely warned by a holy agent to summon thee to his house, and to hear sayings from thee.
So, having invited them in, he lodged them. And on the morrow Peter went forth with them, and certain of the brothers from Joppa went with him.
And on the morrow they entered into Caesarea. And Cornelius was waiting for them, having called together his kinsmen and close friends.
And when it came about for Peter to enter, Cornelius, having met him, after falling down at his feet, worshiped.
But Peter lifted him up, saying, Stand up. I am also myself a man.
And as he conversed with him, he went in and found many who came together.
And he said to them, Ye understand how it is unlawful for a Jewish man to fraternize or to visit with a foreign man, and yet God demonstrated to me not to call one man profane or unclean.
And so I came without objection when summoned. I ask therefore for what matter ye summoned me.
And Cornelius said, Four days ago I was fasting until this hour, and the ninth hour praying in my house. And behold, a man stood before me in bright apparel.
And he says, Cornelius, thy prayer was heard, and thy charities are remembered before God.
Send therefore to Joppa, and summon Simon, who is surnamed Peter. This man lodges in the house of Simon, a tanner, beside the sea, who, after coming, will speak to thee.
Immediately therefore I sent to thee, and thou did well having come. Now therefore we are all present in the sight of God, to hear all the things commanded thee by God.
And having opened his mouth, Peter said, In truth, I am overwhelmed that God is not partial,
but in every nation, he who fears him, and works righteousness, is acceptable to him.
The word that he sent forth to the sons of Israel, preaching good news, peace by Jesus Christ (this man is Lord of all),
ye know, the word having occurred throughout the whole of Judea beginning from Galilee after the immersion that John preached-
Jesus of Nazareth-how God anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power, who passed through doing good, and healing all those who were oppressed by the devil, because God was with him.
And we are witnesses of all that he did both in the country of the Jews, and in Jerusalem, whom also they killed, having hung on a tree.
This man God raised up the third day, and granted him to become manifest,
not to all the people, but to witnesses who were previously chosen by God, to us, who ate and drank with him after he arose from the dead.
And he commanded us to preach to the people, and to solemnly testify that this is the man designated by God, judge of the living and the dead.
To this man all the prophets testify, that every man who believes in him, to receive remission of sins through his name.
While Peter still spoke these sayings, the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word.
And the faithful men of circumcision were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because also on the Gentiles the gift of the Holy Spirit was poured out.
For they heard them speaking in tongues and magnifying God. Then Peter answered,
Can any man forbid the water for these not to be immersed, who have received the Holy Spirit as we also?
And he commanded them to be immersed in the name of the Lord. Then they asked him to remain some days.

Now the apostles and the brothers who were in Judea heard that the Gentiles also received the word of God.
And when Peter came up to Jerusalem, the men of circumcision contended against him,
saying, Thou went in to uncircumcised men, having also eaten with them.
But when Peter began, he expounded to them in order, saying,
I was in the city of Joppa praying, and in a trance I saw a vision, a certain container descending, as a great sheet being lowered from heaven by four corners, and it came as far as to me,
having gazed at which, I was examining. And I saw the four footed things of the earth, and the wild beasts, and the creeping things, and the birds of the sky.
And I heard a voice saying to me, Having risen, Peter, kill and eat.
But I said, Not so, Lord, because nothing profane or unclean has ever entered into my mouth.
But a voice answered me for a second time out of heaven, What God has cleansed, thou shall not make profane.
And this happened thrice, and all were drawn up again into heaven.
And behold, immediately three men stood at the house in which I was, who were sent from Caesarea to me.
And the Spirit told me to go with them, doubting nothing. And these six brothers also went with me, and we entered into the man's house.
And he informed us how he saw the agent in his house, who stood and said to him, Send forth men to Joppa, and summon Simon, the man surnamed Peter,
who will speak sayings to thee, by which thou will be saved, thou and all thy house.
And as I began to speak, the Holy Spirit fell on them, just as also on us at the beginning.
And I remembered the saying of the Lord, how he said, John indeed immersed in water, but ye will be immersed in the Holy Spirit.
If then God gave to them the identical gift as also to us who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, but what power was I to hinder God?
And when they heard these things, they relaxed and glorified God, saying, Then God has also granted to the Gentiles repentance to life.
Indeed therefore those who were scattered abroad from the persecution that occurred against Stephen passed through as far as Phoenicia and Cyprus and Antioch, speaking the word to none except Jews only.
And some of them were men, Cyprians and Cyrenians, who, having come to Antioch, spoke to the Hellenists, preaching good news, the Lord Jesus.
And the hand of the Lord was with them, and a great number who believed turned to the Lord.
And the word about them was heard in the ears of the church at Jerusalem, and they dispatched Barnabas to pass through as far as Antioch,
who, having arrived, and having seen the grace of God, rejoiced. And he encouraged all, with purpose of heart, to remain in the Lord.
Because he was a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit and of faith. And a considerable multitude was added to the Lord.
And Barnabas departed to Tarsus to seek Saul,
and when he found him, he brought him to Antioch. And it came to pass a whole year for them to be assembled in the congregation, and to teach a considerable multitude, and to call the disciples Christians, first at Antioch.
Now in these days prophets came down from Jerusalem to Antioch.
And one of them named Agabus, after standing up, signified by the Spirit there was going be a great famine in the whole world, which also happened under Claudius Caesar.
And the disciples, as any man prospered, determined, each of them regarding aid, to send to the brothers who dwell in Judea,
which also they did, having sent it to the elders by the hand of Barnabas and Saul.

Now about that time Herod the king threw on hands to harm some of those from the church.
And he killed James the brother of John with the sword.
And after seeing that it was pleasing the Jews, he proceeded to arrest Peter also (and those were the days of unleavened bread),
whom, having also arrested, he put in prison, having delivered to four quaternions of soldiers to guard him, intending after the Passover to bring him forth to the people.
Indeed therefore Peter was kept in the prison, but fervent prayer was being made by the church to God for him.
And when Herod was about to bring him forth, that night Peter was sleeping between two soldiers, bound by two chains. And guards in front of the door guarded the prison.
And behold, an agent of the Lord stood near, and light shone in the room. And after striking the side of Peter, he raised him up, saying, Get up quickly. And his chains fell off from his hands.
And the agent said to him, Gird thyself, and tie on thy sandals. And he did so. And he says to him, Throw on thy garment, and follow me.
And after going out, he followed him. And he had not seen that the thing happening by the agent was true, but presumed to see a vision.
And when they passed a first and a second watch, they came to the iron gate, the one leading to the city, which opened spontaneously to them. And after going out, they advanced one street. And straightaway the agent withdrew from him.
And when Peter came to himself, he said, Now I know truly, that the Lord dispatched his agent and delivered me out of the hand of Herod and all the expectation of the people of the Jews.
And having realized it, he came to the house of Mary the mother of John, surnamed Mark, where a considerable were gathered and praying.
And when Peter knocked the door of the gate, a servant girl named Rhoda came to hearken.
And after recognizing Peter's voice, she did not open the gate for joy, but having ran in, she reported Peter was standing in front of the gate.
And they said to her, Thou are mad. But she insisted to have it so. But they said, It is his agent.
But Peter continued knocking, and when they opened, they saw him, and were astonished.
But after motioning to them with the hand to be silent, he described to them how the Lord brought him out of the prison. And he said, Report these things to James, and to the brothers. And having departed, he went to a different place.
But having become day, there was no small stir among the soldiers what then became of Peter.
And Herod, who sought for him, and not having found, having examined the guards, he commanded them to be led away. And going down from Judea to Caesarea, he remained there.
Now Herod was angry at the Tyrians and Sidonians. But they came with one accord to him, and, having persuaded Blastus the man over the king's bedchamber, they requested peace, because their country was sustained from the monarchy.
And at a set day Herod, having arrayed himself in royal apparel, and having sat on the tribunal, he made an oration to them.
And the populace shouted, The voice of a god, and not of a man.
And immediately an agent of the Lord struck him, because he did not give glory to God. And after becoming worm-eaten, he expired.
But the word of God grew and multiplied.
And Barnabas and Saul turned back in Jerusalem after fulfilling the service, also having taken along John who was surnamed Mark.

Now there were some men from the congregation that was in Antioch, prophets and teachers, including Barnabas, and Simeon called Niger, and Lucius the Cyrenian, and Manaen reared with Herod the tetrarch, and Saul.
And while they were serving the Lord, and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, Separate to me now Barnabas and Saul for the work that I have called them.
Then, having fasted and prayed and laid hands on them, they sent them away.
Indeed therefore these men, having been sent forth by the Holy Spirit, went down to Seleucia, and from there they sailed for Cyprus.
And after becoming in Salamis, they proclaimed the word of God in the synagogues of the Jews, and they also had John for a helper.
And after going through the island as far as Paphos, they found a certain sorcerer, a Jewish false prophet, whose name was Bar-jesus,
who was with the proconsul, Sergius Paulus, an intelligent man. This man, having summoned Barnabas and Saul, sought to hear the word of God.
But Elymas the sorcerer (for so his name is translated) opposed them, seeking to deviate the proconsul from the faith.
But Saul (the man is also Paul) having been filled with the Holy Spirit, and having gazed on him,
said, O man full of all deceit and all recklessness, thou son of the devil, thou enemy of all righteousness, will thou not cease distorting the straight ways of the Lord?
And now, behold, a hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou will be blind, not seeing the sun until a time. And immediately there fell on him gloom and darkness, and going around he sought hand-guides.
Then the proconsul, who saw that which happened, believed, being astonished at the doctrine of the Lord.
Now those around Paul, having launched from Paphos, they came to Perga in Pamphylia. But John, having departed from them, returned to Jerusalem.
And they, having passed through from Perga, arrived at Antioch of Pisidia, and after entering into the synagogue on the sabbath day, they sat down.
And after the reading of the law and the prophets the synagogue rulers sent to them, saying, Men, brothers, if there is among you a word of exhortation for the people, speak.
And Paul having stood up, and having motioned with the hand, he said, Men! Israelites and those who fear God, listen.
The God of this people Israel chose our fathers, and raised up the people during the sojourn in the land of Egypt. And with a lofty arm he brought them out of it.
And for about a forty-year time he was patient with them in the wilderness.
And having destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he allotted their land to them.
And after these things he gave them judges about four hundred and fifty years until Samuel the prophet.
And afterward they asked for a king, and God gave them Saul the son of Kish, a man of the tribe of Benjamin, for forty years.
And having removed him, he raised up David for a king to them, also about whom he said, when he testified, I have found David the son of Jesse, a man according to my heart, who will do all my purposes.
From this man's seed according to promise, God brought salvation to Israel,
John having earlier proclaimed, before his coming presence, the immersion of repentance to Israel.
And as John was fulfilling his course, he said, Whom do ye suppose me to be? I am not, but behold, he comes after me of whom I am not worthy to loose the shoes of his feet.
Men, brothers, sons of the race of Abraham, and those among you who fear God, to you the word of this salvation was sent.
For those who dwell in Jerusalem, and their rulers, not having known this and the voices of the prophets being read at every sabbath, they fulfilled, having condemned him.
And not having found one cause of death in him, they asked for Pilate to kill him.
And when they completed all the things written about him, having taken him down from the tree, they laid him in a tomb.
But God raised him from the dead,
who was seen for more days by those who came up with him from Galilee to Jerusalem, who are witnesses of him to the people.
the promise to the fathers, which happened because God has fulfilled this to us their children, having raised up Jesus,
as also it is written in the second psalm, Thou are my Son, today I have begotten thee.
I will give to you the faithful holy things of David.
Therefore also he says in another, Thou will not give thy Holy Man to see decay.
For indeed David, who served his own generation in the plan of God, became asleep, and was added near his fathers, and saw decay.
But he whom God raised up saw no decay.
Be it known to you therefore, men, brothers, that through this man remission of sins is proclaimed to you.
And from all things of which ye could not be make righteous by the law of Moses, in this man every man who believes is made righteous.
Behold, ye scoffers, and wonder, and perish, because I work a work in your days, which ye would, no, not believe, if some man should fully narrate it to you.
And as they went out from the synagogue of the Jews, the Gentiles urged that these sayings be spoken to them the next sabbath.
Now after the synagogue was dismissed, many of the Jews and of the devout proselytes followed Paul and Barnabas, who, while conversing, persuaded them to continue in the grace of God.
And on the coming sabbath almost all the city was assembled to hear the word of God.
But when the Jews saw the multitudes, they were filled of envy, and contradicted the things spoken by Paul, contradicting and slandering.
But having spoken boldly, Paul and Barnabas said, It was necessary for the word of God to be spoken first to you, but since ye thrust it away, and judge yourselves unworthy of eternal life, lo, we turn to the Gentiles.
I have placed thee for a light of Gentiles, for thee to be for salvation as far as the extremity of the earth.
And hearing this, the Gentiles were glad and glorified the word of the Lord. And as many as were appointed for eternal life believed.
And the word of the Lord was spread abroad through the whole region.
But the Jews incited the religious women, and the prominent women, and the principle men of the city, and raised up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas. And they threw them out of their boundaries.
But after shaking off the dust of their feet against them, they came to Iconium.
And the disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit.

And it came to pass in Iconium according to the same thing, for them to enter into the synagogue of the Jews, and to speak so as for a great quantity to believe, both of Jews and of Greeks.
But the disobedient Jews aroused the souls of the Gentiles, and made them evil against the brothers.
Indeed therefore they remained a considerable time speaking boldly in the Lord-him testifying to the word of his grace, granting signs and wonders to occur by their hands.
But the majority of the city was divided, and verily there were those with the Jews, and those with the apostles.
And as a violent movement developed, both of the Gentiles and of the Jews, with their rulers, to denounce and to stone them,
having become aware of it, they fled to the cities of Lycaonia, Lystra, and Derbe, and the neighboring region.
And there they were preaching the good news.
And a certain man was sitting in Lystra, disabled in his feet, being a cripple from his mother's belly, who had never walked.
This man was listening to Paul speaking, who, having gazed at him, and having seen that he has faith to be healed,
said with a great voice, Stand correctly on thy feet. And he leaped up and walked.
And the multitudes who saw what Paul did, lifted up their voice, speaking Lycaonian, The gods came down to us, having become like men.
And they actually called Barnabas, Zeus, and Paul, Hermes, because he was the man who led the word.
And the priest of Zeus, being in front of their city, after bringing oxen and garlands to the gates, wanted to sacrifice with the multitudes.
But when the apostles, Barnabas and Paul, heard, having torn their garments, they rushed into the crowd, crying out
and saying, Men, why are ye doing these things? We also are men of like nature with you, proclaiming good news to you, to turn from these vain things to the living God, who made the heaven and the earth and the sea, and all the things in them,
who in the generations that have passed allowed all the nations to go in their own ways,
although he did not leave himself without evidence, doing good and giving you rains from heaven and fruitful seasons, filling our hearts of food and gladness.
And saying these things, they scarcely restrained the multitudes not to sacrifice to them.
But Jews came from Antioch and Iconium. And having persuaded the crowds, and having stoned Paul, they dragged him out of the city, after presuming him to be dead.
But the disciples having surrounded him, after rising, he came into the city. And on the morrow he departed with Barnabas to Derbe.
And having preached the good news to that city, and having made considerable disciples, they returned to Lystra, and to Iconium, and to Antioch,
strengthening the souls of the disciples, exhorting them to continue in the faith, and that it was necessary for us to enter into the kingdom of God through many tribulations.
And having appointed elders for them in every congregation, having prayed with fasting, they entrusted them to the Lord, in whom they had believed.
And after passing through Pisidia, they came to Pamphylia.
And when they spoke the word in Perga, they went down to Attalia,
and from there they sailed to Antioch, from where they were delivered to the grace of God for the work that they fulfilled.
And after arriving, and after gathering the assembly together, they reported as many things as God did with them, and that he opened a door of faith to the Gentiles.
And they remained there no little time with the disciples.

And certain men, who came down from Judea, taught the brothers, Unless ye will be circumcised in the custom of Moses, ye cannot be saved.
Therefore, no small dissension and debate having developed with Paul and Barnabas against them, they appointed Paul and Barnabas, and some other men from them, to go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders in Jerusalem about this issue.
Indeed therefore, having been helped for the trip by the congregation, they passed through Phoenicia and Samaria, describing the conversion of the Gentiles. And they caused great joy to all the brothers.
And after arriving in Jerusalem, they were received by the church and the apostles and the elders. And they reported as many things as God did with them.
But some of the men who believed from the sect of the Pharisees rose up, saying, It is necessary to circumcise them, and to command them to keep the law of Moses.
And the apostles and the elders were assembled together to see about this matter.
And when much debate occurred, Peter having risen up, he said to them, Men, brothers, ye know that from past days among us, God chose the Gentiles to hear through my mouth the word of the good news, and to believe.
And God, who knows the heart, testified to them, having given them the Holy Spirit, just as also to us.
And he made not one distinction between both us and them, having purified their hearts by faith.
Now therefore why do ye challenge God, to place a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear?
But through the grace of the Lord Jesus, we believe to be saved, in the same way as those men also.
And all the multitude kept silent, and they heard Barnabas and Paul describing how many signs and wonders God did among the Gentiles through them.
And after they were quiet, James answered, saying, Men, brothers, hear me.
Simeon described how God first came to help, to take from the Gentiles a people for his name.
And to this the words of the prophets agree, as it is written,
After these things I will return, and I will rebuild the tabernacle of David that has fallen. And I will rebuild the things of it that have been demolished, and I will restore it,
so that the rest of men might seek the Lord, and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is called upon them, says the Lord, who does these things.
Known to God from the age are all his works.
Therefore I judge not to trouble those from the Gentiles who are turning to God,
but to write to them, to abstain from the pollutions of idols, and from fornication, and from what is strangled, and from blood.
For Moses from generations past, has from city to city those who preach him, being read in the synagogues on every sabbath.
Then it was decided by the apostles and the elders, with the whole assembly, to send men chosen from them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas, namely, Judas called Barsabbas, and Silas, leading men among the brothers,
The apostles, and the elders, and the brothers, to those down in Antioch and Syria and Cilicia, to the brothers of the Gentiles, greeting.
Since we have heard that certain men who went out from us have troubled you with words, disturbing your souls, saying to be circumcised, and to keep the law, to whom we did not command,
it was decided by us, having become unanimous, to send chosen men to you with our beloved Barnabas and Paul,
men who have given over their lives for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We have therefore sent Judas and Silas, themselves also declaring the same things by speech.
to abstain from things sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication, keeping yourselves from which, ye will do well. Be strong.
Indeed therefore after being dismissed, they came to Antioch, and having gathered the multitude together, they delivered the letter.
And after reading it, they rejoiced for the encouragement.
And Judas and Silas, being themselves also prophets, exhorted the brothers by much speech, and strengthened them.
And after spending some time, they were dismissed with peace from the brothers to the apostles.
[This verse is not in the majority of the Greek manuscripts.]
But Paul and Barnabas continued in Antioch, teaching and preaching good news, the word of the Lord, with many others also.
And after some days Paul said to Barnabas, After returning, surely we could help our brothers in every city in which we proclaimed the word of the Lord, how they fare.
And Barnabas wanted to take along John called Mark.
But Paul thought it not worthy to bring along this man who withdrew from them from Pamphylia, and not having gone with them to the work.
Therefore a provocation developed, so as for them to separate from each other, and Barnabas to sail for Cyprus, after taking Mark,
but Paul, having selected Silas, went forth after being delivered to the grace of God by the brothers.
And he passed through Syria and Cilicia, encouraging the congregations.

And he came to Derbe and to Lystra. And behold, a certain disciple was there, named Timothy, the son of a certain faithful Jewish woman, but of a Greek father,
who was well reported of by the brothers at Lystra and Iconium.
Paul wanted this man to go forth with him. And having taken him, he circumcised him because of the Jews who were in those regions, for they had all seen that his father was a Greek.
And as they were going through the cities, they delivered to them the decrees to keep, which were determined by the apostles and elders at Jerusalem.
Indeed therefore the congregations were strengthened in the faith, and increased in number daily.
But having passed through the region of Phrygia and Galatia, having been forbidden by the Holy Spirit to speak the word in Asia,
having come toward Mysia, they attempted to go toward Bithynia. And the Spirit did not allow them.
And after passing by Mysia, they came down to Troas.
And a vision appeared to Paul during the night. A certain Macedonian man was standing, imploring him, and saying, After crossing over into Macedonia, help us.
And after he saw the vision, straightaway we sought to go forth into Macedonia, concluding that the Lord called us to preach the good news to them.
Therefore, having launched from Troas, we took a straight course to Samothrace, and the next day to Neapolis,
and from there to Philippi, which is a principle city of the district of Macedonia colony. And we were in the same city remaining some days.
And on the sabbath day we went outside the city beside a river, where it was customary for prayer to be. And having sat down, we spoke to the women who came together.
And a certain woman named Lydia, a seller of purple of the city of Thyatira, a woman who worshiped God, was listening, whose heart the Lord opened to heed the things being spoken by Paul.
And when she was immersed, and her household, she urged us, saying, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, after coming into my house, remain. And she constrained us.
And it came to pass, as we were going to prayer, for a certain servant girl having a spirit of divination to meet us, who brought her masters much business by soothsaying.
This woman having followed Paul and us was crying out, saying, These men are bondmen of the Most High God, who proclaim to us the way of salvation.
And she did this on many days. But Paul, after being exasperated, and having turned, he said to the spirit, I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her. And it came out the same hour.
But when her masters saw that the hope of their business was gone, having seized Paul and Silas, they dragged them into the marketplace to the rulers.
And after bringing them to the magistrates, they said, These men, being Jews, disturb our city,
and proclaim customs that are not permitted for us to receive nor to do, being Romans.
And the multitude rose up together against them. And the magistrates, having torn off their clothes, commanded to beat them with rods.
And having laid many blows upon them, they cast them into prison, having ordered the jailor to guard them securely,
who, having received such an order, threw them into the inner prison, and fastened their feet in the stocks.
Now toward midnight Paul and Silas, while praying, were singing praises to God, and the prisoners were listening to them.
And suddenly a great earthquake occurred, so as for the foundations of the prison to shake. And immediately all the doors were opened, and the bonds of all the men were unfastened.
And the jailor, who became awake and who saw the prison doors opened, having drawn out a sword was going to kill himself, supposing the prisoners to have fled.
But Paul cried out in a great voice, saying, Do nothing harmful to thyself, for we are all here.
And having asked for lights, he rushed in, and having become trembling, he fell down before Paul and Silas.
And after bringing them outside, he said, Sirs, what must I do so that I may be saved?
And they said, Believe in the Lord Jesus, and thou will be saved, thou and thy household.
And they spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to all those in his house.
And having taken them in that hour of the night, he washed from the stripes, and was immersed, he and all those of him, immediately.
And having brought them into his house, he set out a table, and rejoiced, having believed in God with all his house.
But when it became day, the magistrates sent out the police, saying, Release those men.
The magistrates have sent out so that ye may be released. Now therefore after coming out, go in peace.
But Paul said to them, Having beaten us publicly, uncondemned men, being Romans, they cast us into prison, and now they thrust us out privately? Certainly not, but after coming, they shall lead us out.
And the police reported these sayings to the magistrates, and they were afraid when they heard that they were Romans.
And having come they besought them, and when they brought them out, they asked them to go out of the city.
And having departed from the prison, they came in to Lydia. And after seeing the brothers, they encouraged them, and departed.

Now after passing through Amphipolis and Apollonia, they came to Thessalonica where there was a synagogue of the Jews.
And according to Paul's custom, he went in to them, and for three sabbaths he discoursed with them from the scriptures,
explaining and pointing out that it was necessary for the Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead, and, This Jesus, whom I proclaim to you, is the Christ.
And some of them were persuaded, and joined with Paul and Silas, and of the devout Greeks a great quantity, and of the prominent women not a few.
But the disobedient Jews having taken along certain evil men of the marketplaces, and having gathered a mob, were rioting the city. And having stood by the house of Jason, they sought to bring them out to the populace.
And not having found them, they dragged Jason and some brothers to the city rulers, shouting, The men who have agitated the world, these are present here also,
whom Jason has received. And all these men are acting against the decrees of Caesar, asserting another man to be king, Jesus.
And they disturbed the multitude and the city rulers when they heard these things.
And after taking bond from Jason and the other men, they released them.
And the brothers straightaway sent both Paul and Silas away through the night to Berea, who, when they arrived, went into the synagogue of the Jews.
But these were more noble than those in Thessalonica, who received the word with all willingness, examining the scriptures daily, if it has these things this way.
Indeed therefore many of them believed, also of the prominent Greek women, and of men, not a few.
But when the Jews of Thessalonica also learned that the word of God was proclaimed by Paul at Berea, they came there also, agitating the crowds.
But then straightaway the brothers sent Paul away to go as far as to the sea, but both Silas and Timothy remained there.
And those who brought Paul led him as far as Athens. And after taking a command for Silas and Timothy, that they should come to him quickly, they departed.
But while Paul waited for them in Athens, his spirit was aroused within him, seeing the city being completely idolatrous.
Indeed therefore he was discoursing in the synagogue with the Jews, and with those who worship, and in the marketplace every day with those who happened by.
And also some of the Epicurean and Stoic philosophers encountered him. And some said, Whatever does this babbler want to say? But others, He seems to be a proclaimer of strange deities, because he brought the good news-Jesus and the resurrection.
And having taken him, they brought him to the Areopagus, saying, Can we understand what this new doctrine is, being spoken by thee?
For thou bring some surprising things to our ears. Therefore, we want to know whatever these things aim to be.
Now all the Athenians, and the foreigners who dwell alien there, were at leisure in nothing else, than to tell or to hear something new.
And having stood in the middle of the Areopagus, Paul said, Athenian men, I perceive you as deity-fearing in all things.
For, passing through and examining your religious objects, I also found an altar on which had been engraved, TO AN UNKNOWN GOD. Whom therefore ye worship unknowingly, him I proclaim to you.
The God who made the world and all things in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in temples made with hands,
nor is he served by the hands of men, as needing anything, since he himself gives to all life, and breath, with all things.
And he made from one blood every nation of men to dwell upon all the face of the earth, having determined prescribed times, and the limits of their occupancy,
to search for the Lord, if indeed perhaps they might grope for him and find him, although being not far from each one of us.
For in him we live, and move, and exist, as also some of the performers from you have said, For of him we are also offspring.
Being therefore offspring of God, we ought not think the Divine to be like gold, or silver, or stone handiwork of the skill and thought of man.
Indeed therefore having overlooked the times of ignorance, God now commands for all men everywhere to repent.
Because he appointed a day during which he is going to judge the world in righteousness by a man whom he appointed, having provided assurance to all men because he raised him from the dead.
But when they heard the resurrection of the dead, of course they mocked, but others said, We will hear thee again about this.
And so Paul departed from among them.
But some men, having joined with him, believed, among whom was also Dionysius the Areopagite, and a woman named Damaris, and others with them.

And after these things Paul having separated from Athens, he came to Corinth.
And having found a certain Jew named Aquila, a man of Pontus by origin, who recently came from Italy, and his wife Priscilla, because Claudius arranged for all the Jews to separate from Rome, he came to them.
And because he was of the same craft, he abode with them, and was working, for they were of the tentmakers craft.
And he was discoursing in the synagogue every sabbath, and was persuading Jews and Greeks.
And when both Silas and Timothy came down from Macedonia, Paul was being held by the Spirit, fully testifying to the Jews, Jesus the Christ.
But when they opposed and slandered him, having shaken out his clothes, he said to them, Your blood is upon your heads. I am clean. From henceforth I will go to the Gentiles.
And having departed from there, he went into the house of a certain man named Justus, who worships God, whose house was adjoining the synagogue.
And Crispus, the synagogue ruler, believed in the Lord with his whole household, and many of the Corinthians who heard believed, and were immersed.
And the Lord spoke to Paul by a vision at night, Fear not, but speak, and be not silent,
because I am with thee, and no man will lay upon thee to harm thee, because many people are for me in this city.
And he remained a year and six months, teaching the word of God among them.
But Gallio being proconsul of Achaia, the Jews with one accord attacked Paul and brought him to the judgment seat,
saying, This man is persuading men to worship God against the law.
But when Paul was going to open his mouth, Gallio said to the Jews, If therefore indeed it were some crime or evil reckless deed, O ye Jews, I would have tolerated you according to the matter.
But if it is an issue about a word and names and the law from you, look ye yourselves, for I do not intend to be a judge of these things.
And he drove them from the judgment seat.
But all the Greeks, having taken Sosthenes the synagogue ruler, were beating him in front of the judgment seat. And Gallio was not going to judge, even of these things.
But Paul, who still remained considerable days with the brothers, having separated, sailed away to Syria (and with him Priscilla and Aquila), having shaved his head in Cenchrea, for he had a vow.
And he came to Ephesus and left behind those there, but having entered into the synagogue himself, he discoursed with the Jews.
And when they asked him to remain on more time with them, he did not consent,
but separated from them, having said, I must definitely keep the coming feast at Jerusalem, but I will return again to you, God willing. And he launched from Ephesus.
And after coming down to Caesarea, having gone up and greeted the church, he went down to Antioch.
And after spending some time, he departed, passing through the region of Galatia and Phrygia, successively, strengthening all the disciples.
Now a certain Jew named Apollos, an Alexandrian by origin, an eloquent man, came to Ephesus, being mighty in the scriptures.
This was a man who was instructed in the way of the Lord. And being fervent in the Spirit, he was speaking and teaching accurately the things about the Lord, knowing only the immersion of John.
And this man began to speak boldly in the synagogue, but when Aquila and Priscilla heard him, they took him aside, and expounded to him the way of God more accurately.
And when he intended to pass through into Achaia, the brothers wrote, having encouraged the disciples to receive him, who, when he arrived, assisted much those who believed through the grace.
For he forcibly refuted the Jews in public, demonstrating by the scriptures Jesus to be the Christ.

And it came to pass while Apollos was at Corinth, for Paul, having passed through the upper regions, to come to Ephesus. And having found some disciples,
he said to them, Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye believed? And they said to him, But we have not even heard if there is a Holy Spirit.
And he said to them, Into what then were ye immersed? And they said, Into John's immersion.
And Paul said, John indeed immersed an immersion of repentance, saying to the people that they should believe in him who was coming after him, that is, in Jesus, the Christ.
And when they heard this, they were immersed in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And Paul having laid hands on them, the Holy Spirit came on them, and they spoke in tongues, and prophesied.
And all the men were about twelve.
And after entering into the synagogue, he spoke boldly for three months, discoursing and persuading the things about the kingdom of God.
But when some were hardened and disobedient, speaking evil of the Way before the multitude, having withdrawn from them, he separated the disciples, discoursing daily in the school of a certain Tyrannus.
And this happened for two years, so as for all those dwelling in Asia to hear the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.
And God was doing extraordinary miracles by the hands of Paul,
so as to even bring handkerchiefs or aprons from his skin to those who were incapacitated and to free their infirmities from them, and the evil spirits to go out from them.
But some of the wandering Jewish exorcists, attempted to name the name of the Lord Jesus over those who had the evil spirits, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul proclaims.
And there were some sons of Sceva, a Jewish chief priest, seven doing this.
And having answered, the evil spirit said, I know Jesus and I recognize Paul, but who are ye?
And the man in whom was the evil spirit, leaping on them, and having overpowered them, he prevailed against them, so as for them to flee out of that house naked and wounded.
And this became known to all, both Jews and Greeks, to those who dwell at Ephesus. And fear fell upon them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.
And many of those who have believed came, confessing, and reporting their practices.
And a considerable number of those who practiced magical things, having brought their books together, burned them in the sight of all. And they counted the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver.
Thus the word of the Lord was growing mightily and was prevailing.
Now when these things were fulfilled, Paul decided in the spirit, after passing through Macedonia and Achaia, to go to Jerusalem, having said, After becoming there, I must also see Rome.
And having sent into Macedonia two of those who help him, Timothy and Erastus, he himself stayed in Asia for a while.
And about that time there developed no small stir about the Way.
For a certain silversmith named Demetrius who makes silver shrines of Artemis, brought no little work to the craftsmen,
to whom also (having assembled the workmen about such things) he said, Men, ye know that our prosperity is from this work.
And ye see and hear, that not only at Ephesus, but almost in all Asia, this man Paul, having persuaded them, turned away a considerable multitude, saying that there are no gods made by hands.
And not only is this our part liable to come into disrepute, but also the temple of the great goddess Artemis is going to be regarded for nothing, and also her magnificence be destroyed, whom all Asia and the world worship.
And when they heard this, having become full of wrath, they cried out, saying, The great Artemis of Ephesians.
And the whole city was filled with the confusion. And they rushed with one accord into the theatre, having seized Gaius and Aristarchus, Macedonians, traveling companions of Paul.
And when Paul wanted to enter in to the crowd, the disciples did not let him.
And also some of the Asian officers, being their friends, having sent to him, implored him not to give himself into the theatre.
Indeed therefore some cried out one thing, some another, for the assembly was confused, and most had not seen why they had come together.
And they urged forward Alexander out of the multitude, having put him forward from the Jews. And Alexander having waved his hand, wanted to make a defense to the crowd.
But after recognizing that he was a Jew, one voice developed from them all, crying out for about two hours, The great Artemis of Ephesians.
And when the town clerk calmed the multitude, he says, Ephesian men, now who is the man who does not know the city of the Ephesians being temple-guardian of the great goddess Artemis, and of what fell from Zeus?
Therefore these things being undeniable, ye ought to be restrained, and do nothing rash.
For ye brought these men, who are neither sacrilegious nor blaspheming your goddess.
Indeed therefore if Demetrius, and the craftsmen with him, have a matter against any man, forums are brought, and there are proconsuls. Let them accuse each other.
And if ye seek anything about other things, it will be decided in the assembly within law.
For we are also in danger to be accused about the uproar today, there being no cause about which we can give account of this commotion.
And having said these things, he dismissed the assembly.

And after the uproar ceased, Paul having summoned the disciples and having embraced them, he departed to go into Macedonia.
And having passed through those parts, and having exhorted them with many words, he came into Greece.
And having spent three months there, and a conspiracy having developed against him by Jews, intending to go up into Syria, a decision developed to return through Macedonia.
And there accompanied him as far as Asia, Sopater a Berean, and of the Thessalonians, Aristarchus and Secundus, and Gaius a Derbean, and Timothy, and the Asians, Tychicus and Trophimus.
These men, who went ahead, awaited us at Troas.
And we sailed away from Philippi after the days of unleavened bread, and came to them at Troas within five days, where we stayed seven days.
And upon the first day of the week, the disciples having come together to break bread, Paul discoursed with them, intending to depart on the morrow. And he prolonged his speech until midnight.
And there were considerable lights in the upper floor where we were gathered together.
And a certain young man named Eutychus sitting in the window, being carried away by deep sleep (Paul discoursing on more), being carried away by sleep, he fell down below from the third floor, and was taken up dead.
But Paul having come down, he fell on him, and having embraced him he said, Be not troubled, for his life is in him.
And after getting up, and having broken bread and eaten, and having conversed for a considerable time, until dawn, thus he departed.
And they brought the boy alive, and were not a little comforted.
But we, having gone ahead to the ship, went up to Assos, intending from there to take up Paul, for so it was arranged, he himself intending to go on foot.
And when he met with us at Assos, having taken him up, we came to Mitylene.
And having sailed from there on the next day, we arrived opposite Chios, and the next day we came near to Samos. And having remained in Trogyllium, on the following day we came to Miletus.
For Paul determined to sail past Ephesus, so that he might not happen to lose time in Asia. For he was hastening, if it were possible, for him to become at Jerusalem the day of Pentecost.
And from Miletus having sent to Ephesus, he summoned the elders of the congregation.
And when they came to him, he said to them, Ye know, from the first day in which I stepped in Asia, how I became with you all the time,
serving the Lord with all humility, and many tears and trials that befell me by the conspiracies of the Jews.
How I kept back nothing of these things that are beneficial, not to inform you, and to teach you in public, and from house to house,
testifying both to Jews and to Greeks repentance toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus.
And now behold, I, bound in the spirit, am going to Jerusalem, not knowing the things that will happen to me in it,
except that the Holy Spirit testifies from city to city, saying that bonds and afflictions await me.
But I make nothing of the matter, nor do I hold my life precious to myself, so as to fully complete my course with joy, and the ministry that I received from the Lord Jesus, to solemnly testify the good news of the grace of God.
And now behold, I have seen that ye will no longer see my face, ye all among whom I passed through preaching the kingdom of God.
Therefore I solemnly declare to you this day, that I am clean from the blood of all men.
For I did not withdraw from declaring to you the whole plan of God.
Take heed therefore to yourselves, and to all the flock, among which the Holy Spirit placed you guardians, to tend the church of the Lord and God, which he purchased by his own blood.
For I know this, that after my departure grievous wolves will enter in among you, not sparing the flock.
And from you yourselves men will rise up, speaking distorted things, to draw away the disciples after them.
Therefore watch ye, remembering that for three years, night and day, I did not cease warning each one with tears.
And now brothers, I commit you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build up, and to give you an inheritance among all those who have been sanctified.
I coveted no man's silver, or gold, or apparel.
Ye yourselves know that these hands served my needs, and to those who were with me.
I gave you a glimpse of all things, that so laboring ye ought to aid the weak, and to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive.
And having spoken these things, having knelt down, he prayed with them all.
And there developed considerable weeping of all. And having fallen on Paul's neck, they kissed him much,
sorrowing especially for the word that he had spoken, that they were going to see his face no more. And they accompanied him to the ship.

And when it came to pass to launch us, after being drawn away from them, after going a straight course, we came to Cos, and the next day to Rhodes, and from there to Patara.
And having found a ship crossing over to Phoenicia, having gotten on, we launched.
And having sighted Cyprus, and having left it behind on the left side, we sailed to Syria and came down to Tyre, for there the ship was unloading the merchandise.
And having found disciples we remained there seven days, who said to Paul through the Spirit not to go up to Jerusalem.
And when it came to pass for us to finish the days, having gone forth, we were departing, all accompanying us, with women and children, as far as outside the city. And having knelt on the beach we prayed.
And having bid farewell to each other, we went up in the ship, and those men returned to their own things.
And when we finished the voyage from Tyre, we came to Ptolemais. And having greeted the brothers, we remained with them one day.
And on the morrow, after going forth, those around Paul came to Caesarea. And having entered into the house of Philip the evangelist, being of the seven, we dwelt with him.
Now four virgin daughters who prophesied were with this man.
And as we remained more days, a certain prophet named Agabus came down from Judea.
Thus the Jews in Jerusalem will bind the man whose belt this is, and will deliver him into the hands of Gentiles.
And when we heard these things, both we and those local men urged him not to go up to Jerusalem.
And Paul answered, What are ye doing, weeping and breaking my heart? For I fare ready not only to be bound, but also to die in Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus.
And since he was not persuaded, we were quiet, having said, May the will of the Lord happen.
And after these days, having made preparation, we went up to Jerusalem.
And also the disciples from Caesarea went together with us, bringing a certain Mnason, a Cypriot, an old disciple with whom we would lodge.
And when we came to Jerusalem, the brothers received us gladly.
And on the following day Paul went in with us to James, and all the elders were present.
And having greeted them, he reported one by one what God did among the Gentiles through his ministry.
And when the men heard, they glorified God, having said to him, Thou see, brother, how many thousands there are of the Jews who have believed, and they are all zealots of the law.
And they were informed about thee, that thou teach all the Jews throughout the nations desertion from Moses, telling them not to circumcise the children nor to walk by the customs.
What is it therefore? Certainly the multitude needs to get together, for they will hear that thou have come.
Therefore do this that we say to thee. Four men are with us who have a vow on themselves.
Having taken these, be purified with them. And pay expenses for them, so that they may shave the head. And all may know, that things of which they have been informed about thee, are nothing, but thou thyself also walk orderly, keeping the law.
And about the Gentiles who have believed, we sent word, having decided for them to keep no such thing, except for them to guard against what is sacrificed to idols, and from blood, and from what is strangled, and from fornication.
Then Paul, having taken the men on the following day, having been purified with them, entered into the temple, declaring the fulfillment of the days of purification, until the offering was offered for each one of them.
And when the seven days were about to be completed, the Jews from Asia, when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people and threw hands on him,
crying out, Men, Israelites, help. This is the man who teaches all men everywhere against the people, and the law, and this place. And besides he also brought Greeks into the temple, and has defiled this holy place.
For they were men who saw Trophimus the Ephesian in the city with him, whom they supposed that Paul brought into the temple.
And the whole city was moved, and there developed a running together of the people. And having taken Paul they dragged him out of the temple, and straightaway the doors were shut.
And while seeking to kill him, a report went up to the chief captain of the band, that all Jerusalem has been stirred up.
And immediately after taking soldiers and centurions, he ran down to them. And they, when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers, stopped beating Paul.
And the chief captain having come near, he seized him, and commanded him to be bound with two chains. And he inquired whoever he may be, and what it is he has been doing.
And some among the crowd shouted out one thing, some another. And not being able to know the certainty because of the uproar, he commanded him to be carried into the fort.
And it came to pass when on the steps (it happened for him to be carried by the soldiers because of the violence of the crowd,
for the mass of the people followed, crying out, Away with him),
and as Paul was going to be brought into the fort, he says to the chief captain, Is it permitted for me to speak to thee? And he said, Thou know Greek?
Then thou are not the Egyptian who revolted before these days, and who led out into the wilderness the four thousand men of the Assassins?
But Paul said, I am really a Jewish man of Tarsus of Cilicia, a citizen of no insignificant city. And I beg thee, allow me to speak to the people.
And having permitted him, Paul, having stood on the steps, motioned his hand to the people. And when a great hush developed, he called out in the Hebrew language, saying,

Men, brothers, and fathers, hear now my defense to you.
And having heard that he called out to them in the Hebrew language, they offered more silence. And he says,
I am indeed a Jewish man, born in Tarsus of Cilicia, but reared in this city at the feet of Gamaliel, reared accurately in the paternal law, being a zealot of God, as ye all are today.
And I persecuted this Way as far as death, binding and delivering into prisons both men and women.
As also the high priest testifies about me, and all the senior council, from whom also having received letters to the brothers in Damascus, I was going to bring bound even those who were there to Jerusalem so that they might be punished.
And there happened to me, while going and approaching Damascus about noon, suddenly to flash forth from heaven a great light around me.
And I fell to the ground, and heard a voice saying to me, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me?
And I answered, Who are thou, Lord? And he said to me, I am Jesus the Nazarene, whom thou persecute.
And those who were with me indeed saw the light and became afraid, but they heard not the voice of him who spoke to me.
And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said to me, After rising, go into Damascus, and there it will be told thee about all things that have been assigned for thee to do.
And as I was not seeing from the splendor of that light, I came into Damascus, being led by hand by those who accompanied me.
And a certain Ananias, a devout man according to the law, having a good report by all the Jews who dwell there,
having come near me, and having stood by, he said to me, Brother Saul, look up. And I looked up on him the same hour.
And he said, The God of our fathers appointed thee to know his will, and to see the Righteous Man, and to hear a voice from his mouth,
because thou will be a witness for him to all men of the things that thou have seen and heard.
And now what is it going to be? Having arisen, immerse and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.
And it came to pass, my having returned to Jerusalem and while I prayed in the temple, for me to became in a trance.
And I saw him saying to me, Hurry and depart in haste out of Jerusalem, because they will not accept thy testimony about me.
And I said, Lord, they know that I was imprisoning and beating in every synagogue those who believe in thee.
And when the blood of Stephen thy witness was shed, I myself also was standing by, and approving his killing, and keeping the garments of those who killed him.
And he said to me, Depart, because I will send thee far away to Gentiles.
And they heard him until this word. And they lifted up their voice, saying, Away with such a man from the earth, for he is not fit to live.
And of them crying out, and throwing off their garments, and casting dust into the air,
the chief captain commanded him be brought into the fort, having said to examine him by scourging, so that he might know for what reason they shouted against him this way.
And as they stretched him out with the thongs, Paul said to the centurion who stood by, Is it permitted for you to scourge a Roman man, and uncondemned?
And when the centurion heard, having come to the chief captain, he reported, saying, Look! What are thou about to do? For this man is a Roman.
And the chief captain having come, he said to him, Tell me if thou are a Roman. And he said, Yes.
And the chief captain answered, Of a great sum I obtained this citizenship. And Paul said, But then I was born so.
Straightaway therefore those who were about to examine him withdrew from him. And the chief captain was also afraid when he learned that he was a Roman, and because he was who bound him.
But on the morrow, wanting to know the certainty of why he was accused by the Jews, he loosed him from the bonds, and commanded the chief priests and all their council to come. And having brought Paul down, he set him before them.

And Paul, after looking intently at the council, said, Men, brothers, I have been a citizen in all good conscience to God until this day.
And the high priest Ananias ordered those who stood by him to strike his mouth.
Then Paul said to him, God is going to smite thee, a whitewashed wall. Thou even sit judging me according to the law, and violating law, thou command me to be struck?
And those who stood by said, Thou revile God's high priest?
And Paul said, I had not known, brothers, that he is a high priest, for it is written, Thou shall not speak ill of a ruler of thy people.
But when Paul ascertained that the one part were Sadducees and the other Pharisees, he cried out in the council, Men, brothers, I am a Pharisee, son of a Pharisee. About the hope and resurrection of the dead I am judged.
And when he said this, there developed a conflict of the Pharisees and Sadducees, and the group was divided.
For in fact Sadducees say to be no resurrection nor agent nor spirit, but Pharisees acknowledge them all.
And there developed a great clamor. And some of the scholars of the Pharisees part having risen, they argued vehemently, saying, We find nothing wrong in this man. But if a spirit spoke to him, or an agent, we should not fight against God.
And a great conflict having developed, the chief captain, having been alarmed lest Paul might be torn apart by them, commanded the soldiers to go down and take him away from the midst of them, and bring him into the fort.
And the following night the Lord, having stood by him, said, Cheer up, Paul, for as thou have testified these things about me at Jerusalem, so thou must testify also at Rome.
And when it became day, some of the Jews, having made a conspiracy, put themselves under a curse, saying neither to eat nor to drink until they would kill Paul.
And there were more than forty who made this conspiracy,
who, having come near to the chief priests and the elders, said, We have put ourselves under a curse, a curse to taste of nothing until we would kill Paul.
Now therefore ye with the council report to the chief captain that tomorrow he may bring him down to you, as though going to inquire more accurately the things about him. And we, before he comes near, are prepared to kill him.
But the son of Paul's sister, having heard of the ambush, having come and entered into the fort, he informed Paul.
And Paul, having called one of the centurions, said, Take this young man to the chief captain, for he has something to inform him.
Indeed therefore having taken him, he brought him to the chief captain, and says, Paul the prisoner, having called me, asked me to bring this young man to thee, who has something to say to thee.
And the chief captain having grasped his hand, and having gone in private, he asked him, What is it that thou have to inform me?
And he said, The Jews have agreed to ask thee that tomorrow thou would bring Paul down to the council, as though going to inquire something more accurately about him.
Therefore thou should not be persuaded by them, for more than forty men of them wait to ambush him, who have put themselves under an oath, neither to eat nor drink until they have killed him. And now they are ready, expecting the promise from thee.
Indeed therefore the chief captain dismissed the young man, having ordered, Tell no man that thou have shown these things to me.
And having summoned a certain two of the centurions, he said, Prepare two hundred soldiers that they may go to Caesarea, and seventy horsemen, and two hundred spearmen at the third hour of the night.
And provide beasts, so that after mounting Paul, they may bring him safely to Felix the governor,
Claudius Lysias to the eminent governor Felix, greeting.
This man who was seized by the Jews, and was going to be killed by them, having stood by with the soldiers, I rescued him, having learned that he is a Roman.
And wanting to know for what reason they accused him, I brought him down to their council,
whom I found accusing about issues of their law, having not one accusation worthy of death or of bonds.
And when it was reported to me of a plot going to be against the man by the Jews, I immediately sent him to thee, also having commanded the accusers to speak before thee the things against him. Be strong.
Indeed therefore, the soldiers, according to that which was precisely arranged for them, having taken Paul, they brought him through the night to Antipatris.
But on the morrow they returned to the fort, having allowed the horsemen to depart with him,
who, after coming to Caesarea and having delivered the letter to the governor, also presented Paul to him.
And the governor having read it, and having questioned from what province he was, and having found out that he was from Cilicia,
he said, I will hear thee when thine accusers also will arrive. And he commanded him to be kept in the Praetorium of Herod.

And after five days Ananias the high priest came down with the elders, and a certain orator, Tertullus, who appeared to the governor against Paul.
And when he was called, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying, Experiencing much peace because of thee, and worthy deeds happening to this nation because of thy foresight,
we welcome, both always and everywhere, eminent Felix, with all thankfulness.
But, that I may not detain thee on more, I entreat thee in thy clemency to hear us briefly.
For we have found this man a plague, who even instigates sedition among all the Jews throughout the world, and a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes,
who also attempted to profane the temple, whom also we took,
[This verse is not in the majority of the Greek manuscripts.]
from whom thou will be able, having examined him, to learn about all these things of which we accuse him.
And the Jews also agreed, claiming to have these things this way.
And when the governor gestured to him to speak, Paul answered, Knowing for many years thou being a judge to this nation, I gladly make a defense of these things about myself,
thou being able to learn that there are for me not more than twelve days from which I went up to worship in Jerusalem.
And they found me neither in the temple disputing against any man, nor making a gang of a group, nor in the synagogues, nor in the city.
Neither can they prove against me of which things they now accuse me.
But this I confess to thee, that according to the Way that they call a sect, so serve I the paternal God, believing all things written according to the law and the prophets,
having hope toward God, which they themselves also await, to come to be a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust.
And in this I fashion myself, having a conscience always non-stumbling before God and men.
Now after more years I came, going to make donations to my nation, and offerings,
during which certain Jews from Asia found me purified in the temple, not with a crowd or with a tumult,
who ought to be here before thee, and to accuse, if they would have anything against me.
Or let these men themselves say what wrongdoing they found in me, having stood before the council,
About a resurrection of the dead I am judged by you this day.
Now Felix, having heard these things, having known more precisely the things about the Way, he deferred them, having said, When Lysias the chief captain comes down, I will determine the things toward you.
He also arranged for the centurion to guard Paul, and to have reduced confinement, and to forbid none of his own men to serve or to come to him.
And after some days, Felix having arrived with Drusilla, his wife being Jewish, he summoned Paul, and heard him about the faith in Christ.
And as he discoursed about righteousness, and self-control, and the judgment going to be, Felix, having become afraid, answered, Go now, and having a convenient time, I will summon thee.
He also hoped simultaneously that money would be given him by Paul so that he might free him. And so, summoning him more frequently, he conversed with him.
But two years having been fulfilled, Felix received a successor, Porcius Festus. And wanting to lay down favors to the Jews, Felix left behind Paul bound.

Festus therefore having entered into the province, after three days he went up to Jerusalem from Caesarea.
And the high priest and the principal men of the Jews appeared to him against Paul, and urged him,
asking a favor against him, that he would summon him to Jerusalem, making an ambush to kill him on the way.
Indeed therefore Festus answered to keep Paul in Caesarea, and he himself was going to go out quickly.
Therefore he says, Let the able men among you, after coming down together, accuse him if there is anything in this man.
And after remaining among them more than ten days, having gone down to Caesarea, on the morrow having sat on the judgment seat, he commanded Paul to be brought.
And when he arrived, the Jews who came down from Jerusalem stood around, bringing many and serious accusations against Paul, which they could not prove,
while he was defending, Neither against the law of the Jews, nor against the temple, nor against Caesar, have I transgressed anything.
But Festus, wanting to lay down a favor to the Jews, having answered Paul, said, Are thou willing, after going up to Jerusalem, to be judged there about these things before me?
But Paul said, I am standing at the judgment seat of Caesar, where I ought to be judged. I did nothing wrong Jewish, as thou also very well know.
For if I am indeed wrong, and have done anything worthy of death, I do not refuse to die, but if there is nothing of what these men accuse me, no man can give me to them freely. I appeal Caesar.
Then Festus, when he conferred with the council, answered, Thou have appealed Caesar, to Caesar thou will go.
Now some days having passed, Agrippa the king and Bernice arrived at Caesarea, greeting Festus.
And as he was remaining there more days, Festus declared to the king the things concerning Paul, saying, There is a certain man who was left behind a prisoner by Felix,
about whom, when I became in Jerusalem, the chief priests and the elders of the Jews revealed, asking judgment against him.
To whom I answered, that it is not a custom by Romans to give any man freely for destruction, before the man being accused has the accusers in person, and receives an occasion of defense about the accusation.
When therefore they assembled here, not having made one delay, next in order, having sat on the judgment seat, I commanded the man to be brought.
About whom, when the accusers stood up, they brought not one cause of what I supposed,
but had certain issues against him about his own religion, and about a certain Jesus, who has died, whom Paul was claiming to be alive.
And I, being uncertain of the controversy about this man, asked whether he wants to go to Jerusalem and be judged there about these things.
But when Paul appealed to be kept for the decision of Augustus, I commanded him to be kept until I might send him to Caesar.
And Agrippa said to Festus, I also want to hear the man myself. And tomorrow, he says, thou will hear him.
Therefore on the morrow, Agrippa and Bernice having come with great pomp, and having entered into the courtroom, and with the chief captains and the men of prominence who were of the city, and Festus who commanded, Paul was brought in.
And Festus says, King Agrippa, and all who are present with us, ye see this man about whom all the multitude of the Jews appealed to me, both at Jerusalem and here, shouting he ought not to live any longer.
But I, having understood him to have done nothing worthy of death, and also him, this man, having appealed Augustus I decided to send him.
About whom I do not have anything certain to write to the lord. Therefore I brought him before you, and especially before thee, King Agrippa, so that, an examination having occurred, I may have something to write.
For it seems to me unreasonable, sending a prisoner, and not to specify the causes against him.

And Agrippa said to Paul, It is permitted thee to speak for thyself. Then Paul, having stretched forth his hand, made a defense.
Concerning all things of which I am accused by the Jews, King Agrippa, I consider myself blessed, being about to make my defense before thee today.
Especially thee, being an expert of all things regarding Jews, both habits and issues. Therefore I beg thee to hear me patiently.
Indeed therefore, my manner of life from youth, having developed from the beginning among my nation at Jerusalem, all the Jews know,
having known me previously from the beginning, if they were willing to testify, that according to the strictest party of our religion I lived a Pharisee.
And now for the hope of the promise made by God to the fathers, I stand being judged,
to which our twelve tribes, serving in earnestness night and day, hope to attain, about which hope, King Agrippa, I am accused by the Jews!
Why is it judged incredible with you, if God raises the dead?
Indeed therefore I thought it necessary for myself to do many things contrary to the name of Jesus the Nazarene,
which also I did at Jerusalem. And I locked up many of the sanctified in prisons, having received authority from the chief priests. And when they were killed, I gave a vote against them.
And punishing them often at all the synagogues, I compelled them to blaspheme. And being extraordinarily furious toward them, I persecuted them even as far as to outside cities.
And during which, while going to Damascus with the authority and commission of the chief priests,
at midday, O king, I saw on the road a light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun, which shone around me and those who went with me.
And when we all fell to the ground, I heard a voice speaking to me, and saying in the Hebrew language, Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? It is hard for thee to kick against the goads.
And I said, Who are thou, Lord? And he said, I am Jesus whom thou persecute.
But arise, and stand upon thy feet, for I appeared to thee for this, to appoint thee an assistant and a witness both of things that thou saw, and of the things that I will make visible to thee,
delivering thee from the people, and from the Gentiles, to whom I send thee,
to open their eyes to turn about from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God, for them to receive remission of sins and a lot among those who have been sanctified by faith in me.
Whereupon, King Agrippa, I did not become disobedient to the heavenly vision,
but declaring first to those at Damascus and then at Jerusalem, and in all the region of Judea, and to the Gentiles, to repent and return to God, doing works worthy of repentance.
Because of these things the Jews, having seized me in the temple, tried to grasp and kill me.
Having therefore experienced the help from God, I stand to this day solemnly declaring both to small and great, saying nothing apart from what both the prophets and Moses said was going to happen,
that the suffering Christ, since first from a resurrection of the dead, is going to proclaim light to our people and to the nations.
And while he made a defense by these things, Festus said in a loud voice, Paul, thou are mad. Much scholarship is driving thee into madness.
But Paul says, I am not mad, eminent Festus, but I speak forth sayings of truth and soberness.
For the king knows about these things, before whom I also speak boldly. For I am convinced not any of these things, nothing, to be hidden from him. For this was not done in a corner.
King Agrippa, do thou believe the prophets? I know that thou believe.
And Agrippa said to Paul, By a little thou persuade me to become a Christian.
And Paul said, I ever pray to God, both by little and by much, not only thee, but also all who hear me this day, to become such kind as I also am, apart from these bonds.
And when he spoke these things, the king rose up, and the governor, and Bernice, and those who sat with them.
And having withdrawn, they spoke to each other, saying, This man does nothing worthy of death or of bonds.
And Agrippa said to Festus, This man could have been released, if he had not appealed Caesar.

And when it was determined for us to sail for Italy, they delivered both Paul and some other prisoners to a centurion named Julius, of the band of Augustus.
And having gotten on a ship of Adramyttium that was going to sail to the places along Asia, we launched, Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us.
And on another day we put in at Sidon. And Julius, who treated Paul kindly, allowed him to undergo care, after going to his friends.
And having launched from there, we sailed under lee of Cyprus, because the winds were contrary.
And having sailed across the depths along Cilicia and Pamphylia, we came to Myra, of Lycia.
And there, the centurion having found a ship of Alexandria sailing for Italy, he put us in it.
And sailing slowly during considerable days, and with difficulty having come along the Cnidus, the wind not allowing us further, we sailed under lee of Crete, along Salmone.
And sailing by it with difficulty, we came to a certain place called Fair Havens, near to which was Lasea City.
And considerable time having past, and the voyage now being dangerous, also because the Fast was now past, Paul urged,
saying to them, Men, I perceive that the voyage is going to be with injury and much damage, not only of the cargo and the ship, but also of our lives.
But the centurion was convinced more by the captain and the shipmaster than to those things spoken by Paul.
And since the haven was inconvenient to winter in, the majority gave counsel to launch from there also, if somehow they might be able, after arriving at Phoenix, to winter in a haven of Crete, looking toward southwest and northwest.
And when a south wind blew gently, having presumed to have obtained their purpose, after taking up anchor, they sailed very near by Crete.
But not long after, there threw against it a cyclonic wind called the Euroclydon.
And the ship having been caught, and not being able to face the wind, having given up, we were driven.
And having sailed under lee of a certain island called Clauda, we were able with difficulty, to develop control of the skiff.
And having taken that up, they used helps, undergirding the ship. And fearing lest they might fall off into the sandbank, having lowered the vessel, they were driven this way.
And since we were exceedingly storm-tossed, on the next day they jettisoned.
And the third day we cast out by hands the tackling of the ship.
And when neither sun nor stars appeared for more days, and no small storm laying on, all remaining hope for us to be saved was taken away.
And being long without food, then Paul, who stood in the midst of them, said, Ye truly ought, O men, to have complied with me, not to launch from Crete, and gain this damage and loss.
And now I exhort you to cheer up, for there will not be one loss of life from you, except of the ship.
For there stood by me this night an agent of the God whose I am, whom also I serve,
saying, Fear not, Paul. Thou must stand before Caesar, and lo, God has granted thee all those sailing with thee.
Therefore men, cheer up, for I believe God, that it will be so in that way it has been told to me.
But we must fall off upon a certain island.
And when it became the fourteenth night, as we were driven about in the Adriatic sea, toward midnight the sailors suspected some region to come near them.
And having tossed lead, they found twenty fathoms, and having gone a little farther, and having tossed lead again, they found fifteen fathoms.
And fearing lest somehow we might falloff on rough places, having cast off four anchors from the stern, they prayed for day to develop.
And since the sailors sought to flee out of the ship, and having lowered the skiff into the sea in pretense as going to stretch out anchors from the bow,
Paul said to the centurion and to the soldiers, Unless these men remain in the ship, ye cannot be saved.
Then the soldiers cut away the ropes of the skiff, and let it fall off.
And until day was going to develop, Paul urged them all to partake of food, saying, Today is the fourteenth day, waiting, ye continue without food, having taken nothing.
Therefore I encourage you to take of food, for this is for your safety. For not a hair will fall from the head of one of you.
And having said these things, and having taken bread, he expressed thanks to God in the presence of all. And having broke in pieces, he began to eat.
And they all, having become encouraged, also took food.
And all the souls in the ship were two hundred seventy-six.
And after being filled of food, they unloaded the ship, throwing out the wheat into the sea.
And when it became day, they did not recognize the land, but they noticed a certain bay having a beach, onto which, they decided if possible, to drive the ship.
And having cast off the anchors, they left them in the sea, at the same time unfastening the bands of the rudders. And having hoisted up the foresail to the wind, they held firm for the shore.
And having chanced upon a place where two seas meet, they ran the ship aground. And of course, the bow having become stuck, it remained immovable, but the stern was coming apart by the force of the waves.
And a decision of the soldiers developed that they should kill the prisoners, lest any man, having swam away, might escape.
But the centurion, wanting to save Paul, prevented them from their purpose, and commanded those who were able to swim, having first jumped out, to go to the land,
and the remaining, some on boards, and some on any of the things from the ship. And so it came to pass for all to be saved to the land.

And after being saved, then they learned that the island was called Malta.
And the foreigners presented uncommon kindness to us, for, having kindled a fire, they received us all because of the present rain, and because of the cold.
And Paul having gathered a quantity of sticks, and having placed them on the fire, a viper having come out from the heat, it fastened on his hand.
And when the foreigners saw the creature hanging from his hand, they said to each other, Certainly this man is a murderer, whom, though saved from the sea, Justice did not allow to live.
Indeed therefore having shaken off the creature into the fire, he experienced nothing harmful.
But they expected he was going to swell up, or suddenly fall down dead, but when they were long expecting, and seeing nothing amiss happening to him, thinking differently, they declared him to be a god.
Now among the things around that place were fields of the chief of the island, named Publius, who, having received us kindly, lodged us three days.
And it came about for the father of Publius to be laid down, gripped by fever and dysentery, to whom Paul, having entered in, and having prayed, having laid his hands on him, healed him.
Therefore when this happened, the others also who had infirmities on the island came and were healed,
who also honored us with many honorariums. And while putting out to sea, they furnished the things for our necessities.
And after three months we set out in a ship that wintered at the island, an Alexandrian with The Twin Brothers emblem.
And after being brought down to Syracuse, we remained there three days,
from where having made a circuit, we arrived at Rhegium. And after one day, wind from the south having developed, we came a second day to Puteoli,
where, having found brothers, we were invited to stay with them seven days. And so we went toward Rome.
And from there the brothers, who heard these things about us, came for a meeting with us as far as Appius Forum and The Three Taverns, whom, when Paul saw, having expressed thanks to God, he took courage.
And when we came to Rome, the centurion delivered the prisoners to the commandant, but Paul was allowed to dwell by himself with the soldier who guarded him.
And it came to pass after three days, for Paul to call together those who were the principle men of the Jews. And when they came together, he said to them, Men, brothers, I, having done nothing against the people, or the paternal customs, I was delivered a prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the Romans,
who, after examining me, wanted to release me, because there was not one cause of death in me.
But when the Jews spoke against it, I was compelled to appeal Caesar, not as having anything to accuse my nation.
Because of this reason therefore I summoned you to see and to speak with me, for because of the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain.
And they said to him, We neither received letters from Judea about thee, nor did any of the brothers who came report or speak anything bad about thee.
But we think it worthy to hear from thee what thou think. For indeed about this sect, it is known to us that everywhere it is spoken against.
And having appointed a day for him, more came to him into his lodging, to whom he expounded, solemnly testifying the kingdom of God, and persuading them of the things about Jesus, both from the law of Moses and the prophets, from morning until evening.
And some were convinced by the things that were spoken, and some disbelieved.
And being discord among each other, they departed after Paul spoke one thing, saying, Well spoke the Holy Spirit through Isaiah the prophet to our fathers,
saying, Go thou to this people, and say, Hearing ye will hear, and will, no, not understand, and seeing ye will see, and will, no, not perceive.
For this people's heart was made fat, and they hear heavily with the ears. And they shut their eyes, lest they may perceive with the eyes, and hear with the ears, and understand with the heart, and should turn, and I would heal them.
Be it known to you therefore, that the salvation of God was sent to the Gentiles, and they will hear.
And when he said these things, the Jews departed, having much disputing among themselves.
And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired lodging. And he received all who came in to him,
preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching the things about the Lord Jesus Christ with all boldness, without hindrance.

Romans

Paul, a bondman of Jesus Christ, a called apostle having been separated for the good news of God
(which he fore-promised through his prophets in the holy scriptures)
concerning his Son who was made from the seed of David according to flesh.
He who was designated Son of God in power, according to a spirit of holiness, from a resurrection of the dead-Jesus Christ our Lord-
through whom we received grace and apostleship for obedience of faith among all the nations on behalf of his name,
among which ye also are the called of Jesus Christ.
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
First, I indeed express thanks to my God through Jesus Christ for all of you, that your faith is proclaimed in the whole world.
For God is my witness whom I serve in my spirit in the good news of his Son, how unceasingly I make mention of you always in my prayers,
pleading, if somehow now at last I will have a prosperous journey by the will of God to come to you.
For I long to see you, so that I may impart some spiritual gift to you, in order to establish you,
and that is, to be mutually encouraged among you through each other's faith, both yours and mine.
But I do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, that I often intended to come to you (and was prevented until now), so that I might have some fruit also among you, even as among the other Gentiles.
I am debtor both to Greeks and to Barbarians, both to the wise and to the foolish.
So the willingness is in me to preach the good news also to you in Rome.
For I am not ashamed of the good news of Christ, for it is the power of God for salvation to every man who believes, both to the Jew first, and to the Greek.
For the righteousness of God is revealed in it from faith for faith, just as it is written, And the righteous man will live from faith.
For the wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all irreverence and unrighteousness of men, who suppress the truth in unrighteousness,
because what is knowable of God is apparent in them, for God made it known to them.
For the invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things made, both his eternal power and divinity, for them to be without excuse.
Because, although knowing God, they did not glorify him as God, nor were they thankful, but became vain in their reasonings and their heart was darkened without understanding.
Professing to be wise, they became foolish,
and changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an image like corruptible man, and of birds, and four-footed things, and creeping things.
And for this reason God gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to uncleanness, to degrade their bodies among themselves,
who changed the truth of God into the lie, and worshiped and served the creation against him who created it, who is blessed into the ages. Truly.
Because of this God gave them up to shameful passions, for even their females changed the natural use into what is against nature.
And likewise also the males, having left the natural use of the female, burned in their lust toward each other, males with males producing shamelessness, and receiving in themselves the recompense of their deviancy that was fitting.
And just as they did not approve having God in knowledge, God gave them over to an unfit mind, to do things that are not fit;
having been filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, greed, evil; full of envy, murder, strife, deceit, malignity;
being gossips, slanderous, God-hating, aggressors, arrogant boasters, contrivers of evil things, disobedient to parents;
without understanding, untrustworthy, without natural affection, implacable, unmerciful.
Who, knowing the righteousness of God, that those who commit such things are worthy of death, not only do them, but also favor those who do.

Therefore, O man, thou are without excuse, every man who judges, for in what thou judge the other man, thou condemn thyself, for the man who judges is doing the same things.
And we know that the judgment of God is in accordance with truth against those who commit such things.
And think thou this, O man who judge those who do such things and do the same, that thou will escape the judgment of God?
Or do thou despise the wealth of his goodness and forbearance and longsuffering, not knowing that the goodness of God guides thee to repentance?
But according to thy hardness, and thy impenitent heart, thou store up wrath to thyself in the day of wrath, and revelation, and righteous judgment of God,
who will render to each man according to his works,
to those who indeed seek by perseverance of good work, glory and esteem and immortality-eternal life-
but to those of self-interest, and who indeed disobey the truth but have confidence in unrighteousness-anger and wrath,
pressure and restriction, upon every soul of man who produces evil, both of the Jew first, and of the Greek,
but glory and esteem and peace to every man who works good, both to the Jew first, and to the Greek.
For there is no partiality with God.
For as many as have sinned without law will also be destroyed without law, and as many as have sinned in law will be judged by law.
For the hearers of the law are not righteous with God, but the doers of the law will be made righteous.
For when the Gentiles who have no law do by nature the things of the law, these men, not having law, are a law to themselves.
Who show the work of the law written in their hearts, testifying of their conscience, and their thoughts amidst each other accusing or also defending them
in a day when God judges the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my good news.
Behold, thou are called a Jew, and rely upon the law, and boast in God,
and know his will, and approve the things that are significant, being instructed out of the law.
And thou have confidence in thyself to be a guide of the blind, a light of those in darkness,
a corrector of the foolish, a teacher of the childlike, having in the law the essence of knowledge and truth,
thou therefore who teach another, do thou not teach thyself? Thou who preach not to steal, do thou steal?
Thou who say not to commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou who abhor idols, do thou rob temples?
Thou who boast in law, dishonor God by thy transgression of the law.
For the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles because of you, just as it is written.
For circumcision is indeed beneficial if thou perform law, but if thou are a transgressor of law, thy circumcision has become uncircumcision.
If therefore a man of uncircumcision keeps the ordinances of the law, will not his uncircumcision be considered circumcision?
And the man of natural uncircumcision who fulfills the law, will judge thee, a transgressor of law through a document and circumcision.
For he is not a Jew in what is visible, nor is circumcision in what is visible, in flesh,
but he is a Jew in what is hidden, and circumcision is of the heart, in spirit not a document, whose praise is not from men but from God.

What then is the advantage of the Jew? Or what is the benefit of circumcision?
Much every way. First, because they were indeed entrusted with the oracles of God.
For what if some did not believe? Will their unbelief make the assurance of God ineffective?
May it not happen! But let it come to pass God is true, but every man a liar, as it is written, That thou may ever be justified in thy words, and may prevail when thou are criticized.
But if our unrighteousness commends the righteousness of God, what will we say? Is God unrighteous inflicting wrath? (I speak according to a man.)
May it not happen! Otherwise how will God judge the world?
For if by my lie, the truth of God abounded to his glory, why am I also still judged as sinful,
and not (as we are slandered, and as some affirm us to say) that we may do evil so that good things may come (whose condemnation is just)?
What then? Are we better? Not at all. For we already charged both Jews and Greeks to all be under sin,
as it is written, There is no righteous man, not even one.
There is no man who understands. There is no man who seeks God.
All turned away. Together they became useless. There is not a man who does goodness; there is not as much as one.
Their throat is an open grave. With their tongues they deceive. The poison of asps is under their lips,
whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness.
Their feet are swift to shed blood.
Destruction and misery are in their ways,
and the way of peace they have not known.
There is no fear of God before their eyes.
Now we know that as many things as the law says, it says to those in the law, so that every mouth may be stopped, and all the world may become accountable to God.
Because from works of law no flesh will be made right before him, for through law is knowledge of sin.
But now a righteousness of God has been manifested independent of law, being witnessed by the law and the prophets.
And the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ is for all and upon all those who believe, for there is no distinction.
For all have sinned and come short of the glory of God,
being made righteous freely by his grace, through the redemption in Christ Jesus,
whom God set forth an expiatory sacrifice through faith in his blood, for proof of his justice, because of the passing over of the sins that have formerly occurred
(in the forbearance of God), for proof of his justice at the present time, for him to be righteous, and who makes the man from Jesus' faith righteous.
Where then is the boasting? It is excluded. By what law, of works? No, but by a law of faith.
We therefore consider a man to be made righteous by faith independent of works of law.
Or is God of Jews only and not also of Gentiles? Yes, of Gentiles also,
since God is one, who will make the man of circumcision righteous from faith, and the man of uncircumcision through faith.
Do we then make law void through faith? May it not happen! Instead, we establish law.

What then will we say Abraham, our father according to flesh, to have found?
For if Abraham was made righteous from works, he has a boast, but not before God.
For what does the scripture say? And Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him for righteousness.
Now to the man being employed, the wage is not reckoned according to grace, but according to obligation.
But to the man not being employed, but who believes in him who makes the impious man righteous, his faith is reckoned for righteousness.
Just as David also tells the blessedness of the man to whom God imputes righteousness independent of works,
saying, Blessed are those whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed is a man to whom the Lord does, no, not impute sin.
Is this blessedness therefore upon men of circumcision, or also upon men of uncircumcision? For we say, Faith was reckoned to Abraham for righteousness.
How then was it reckoned? When he was in circumcision, or in uncircumcision? Not in circumcision, but in uncircumcision.
And he received the sign of circumcision, as a seal of the righteousness of his faith during uncircumcision, for him to be father of all those who believe during uncircumcision (for righteousness to also be imputed to them),
and father of those of circumcision, to those not only of circumcision, but also to those who march in the steps of faith-of that during the uncircumcision of our father Abraham.
For the promise to Abraham or to his seed, for him to be heir of the world, was not through law, but through a righteousness of faith.
For if those from law are heirs, faith has been made void, and the promise has been made useless.
For the law works wrath. For where there is no law, neither is there transgression.
Because of this it is from faith, so that it is according to grace, in order for the promise to be sure to all the seed, not only to the seed from the law, but also to the seed from the faith of Abraham, who is father of us all
(as it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations), before him whom he believed, of God who makes the dead alive, and who calls things not existing, as existing.
Who, against hope, believed in hope, in order for him to become father of many nations according to that which was spoken, So thy seed will be.
And not being weak in faith he did not regard his body, which was now deadened (being about a hundred years old), and the deadness of Sarah's womb.
And he did not waver in unbelief at the promise of God, but became strong in faith, giving glory to God,
and being fully assured that what he promised, he was able also to perform.
And therefore it was reckoned to him for righteousness.
Now it was not written because of him alone that it was imputed to him,
but also because of us to whom it is going to be imputed, to those who believe in him who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead,
who was delivered up for our offenses, and was raised up for our justification.

Therefore having been made righteous from faith, we have peace toward God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom also we have access by faith for this grace in which we stand, and we take pride in hope of the glory of God.
And not only so, but we also take pride in our tribulations, knowing that tribulation produces perseverance,
and perseverance, character, and character, hope.
And hope does not disappoint, because the love of God has been poured out in our hearts through the Holy Spirit that was given to us.
For while we were yet weak, in due time Christ died for the impious.
For scarcely for a righteous man will some man die, indeed perhaps for the good man some man would even dare to die.
But God commends his love toward us, that, while we were still sinners, Christ died for us.
Much more then, now having been made righteous by his blood, we will be saved from the wrath through him.
For if, while being enemies, we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, much more having been reconciled we will be saved by his life.
And not only so, but also taking pride in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation.
Because of this, just as through one man sin entered into the world, and death through sin, so also death passed to all men, in that all sinned.
For until law sin was in the world, but sin is not imputed when there is no law.
Nevertheless death reigned from Adam until Moses, even over those who did not sin in the likeness of Adam's transgression, who is a type of the coming man.
But in this way also, the gift is not as the transgression. For if by the trespass of the one man the many died, much more the grace of God, and the gift in grace of the one man, Jesus Christ, abounded for the many.
And the gift is not as through one man who sinned, for indeed the judgment from one man was for condemnation, but the gift from many offenses is for righteousness.
For if, by the offense of the one man, death reigned through the one man, much more those who receive the abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness will reign in life through the one man, Jesus Christ.
So then, as through an offense of one man was for condemnation for all men, so also through a righteousness of one man was for justification of life for all men.
For as through the one man's disobedience the many were led sinful, so also through the obedience of the one man the many will be led righteous.
And the law entered so that the offense might abound. But where sin abounded, grace was more abundant,
so that, as sin reigned in death, so also grace might reign, through righteousness, for eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.

What will we say then? We continue in sin so that grace may abound?
May it not happen! How will we who died to sin, still live in it?
Or are ye ignorant that as many as were immersed into Christ Jesus were immersed into his death?
We were buried therefore with him through the immersion into death, so that as Christ was raised up from the dead through the glory of the Father, so also we may walk in newness of life.
For if we have become co-planted in the likeness of his death, then we will also be of the resurrection.
Knowing this, that our old man was crucified with him, so that the body of sin might be inactivated, no longer to enslave us to sin.
For he who has died has been made righteous away from sin.
And if we died with Christ, we believe that we will also live with him,
knowing that Christ, having been raised from the dead, dies no more. Death no more has dominion over him.
For that he died, he died to sin once, but that he lives, he lives to God.
So also ye, reckon yourselves to be indeed dead to sin, but living to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body in order to obey it, in its lusts.
And do not present your body-parts as instruments of unrighteousness to sin, but present yourselves to God, as living out of the dead, and your body-parts as instruments of righteousness to God,
for sin will not have dominion over you. For ye are not under law, but under grace.
What then? May we sin, because we are not under law but under grace? May it not happen!
Know ye not, that to what ye present yourselves as bondmen for obedience, ye are bondmen to what ye obey, whether of sin for death, or of obedience for righteousness?
But thanks to God, that ye were bondmen of sin, but ye obeyed from the heart a model of doctrine for which ye were delivered.
And having been set free from sin, ye were made servile to righteousness
(I speak man-like because of the weakness of your flesh). For as ye presented your body-parts servile to uncleanness, and to lawlessness for lawlessness, so now present your body-parts servile to righteousness for sanctification.
For when ye were bondmen of sin, ye were uninhibited by righteousness.
What fruit therefore did ye have then, of which things ye are now ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
But now having been made free from sin, and having become servile to God, ye have your fruit for sanctification, and the end, eternal life.
For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Or are ye ignorant, brothers (for I speak to men who know the law), that the law has dominion over the man for as long a time as he lives?
For the woman under authority to the living husband has been bound by law, but if the husband should die, she has been released from the law of the husband.
So then, of the living husband, she will be called an adulteress if she becomes to another man, but if the husband should die, she is free from the law, for her not to be an adulteress having become to another man.
Therefore, my brothers, ye also became dead to the law through the body of Christ in order for ye to become to another, to him who was raised from the dead, so that we would bear fruit to God.
For when we were in the flesh, the passions of the sins were working in our body-parts (through the law) in order to bear fruit to death.
But now we have been released from the law, having died to what we were held, so as for us to serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of a document.
What will we say then? The law is sin? May it not happen! Yet I did not know sin except through law. For likewise I would not have known lust, if the law did not say, Thou shall not covet.
But sin, having taken opportunity through the commandment, wrought in me every evil desire, for apart from law sin is dead.
And I was alive once apart from law, but when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died.
And I found to me, the commandment being for life, this is for death.
For sin, having taken opportunity through the commandment, deceived me, and by it killed me.
So the law is indeed holy, and the commandment is holy and righteous and good.
Has therefore what is good become death to me? May it not happen! Instead, it is sin, so that it might be revealed, sin working death in me through what is good, so that through the commandment sin might become sinful to extreme.
For we know that the law is spiritual, but I am carnal, having been sold under sin.
For I do not understand what I do, for I do not do this that I want, but what I hate, this I do.
But if I do this that I do not want, I agree with the law that it is good.
But now I no longer perform it, but the sin dwelling in me.
For I know that good does not dwell in me, that is, in my flesh, for to will is present in me, but to do the good, I find not.
For I do not do good that I want, instead, wrong that I do not want, this I do.
But if I do this that I do not want, I no longer perform it, but sin dwelling in me.
Consequently I find the law in my wanting to do good, that evil is present in me.
For I delight in the law of God according to the inner man,
but I see a different law in my body-parts, warring against the law of my mind, and taking me captive in the law of sin, which is in my body-parts.
I am a wretched man. Who will rescue me out of the body of this death?
I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord. So then, I of myself in the mind indeed serve a law of God, but in the flesh a law of sin.

Consequently nothing is condemnation now to those in Christ Jesus, who walk not according to flesh but according to Spirit.
For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus freed me from the law of sin and of death.
For the impotence of the law, in that it was weak because of the flesh, God, having sent his own Son in a form of flesh of sin, and concerning sin, condemned sin in the flesh,
so that the justice of the law might be fulfilled in us, those who walk not according to flesh, but according to Spirit.
For those who are according to flesh think about the things of the flesh, but those according to Spirit the things of the Spirit.
For the mentality of the flesh is death, but the mentality of the Spirit is life and peace.
Because the mentality of the flesh is enmity against God, for it is not submissive to the law of God, for neither is it able.
And those who are in flesh cannot please God.
But ye are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed the Spirit of God dwells in you. But if any man does not have the Spirit of Christ, this man is not of him.
And if Christ is in you, the body is indeed dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness.
But if the Spirit of him who raised up Jesus from the dead dwells in you, he who raised up the Christ from the dead will also give life to your mortal bodies through his Spirit that dwells in you.
So then, brothers, we are debtors, not to the flesh to live according to flesh.
For if ye live according to flesh, ye are going to die, but if in spirit ye kill the deeds of the body, ye will live.
For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.
For ye did not receive a spirit of bondage again for fear, but ye received a spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
The Spirit itself testifies with our spirit, that we are children of God.
And if children, also heirs, heirs indeed of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; if indeed we suffer jointly, so that we may also be glorified jointly.
For I reckon that the sufferings of the present time are not comparable to the glory that is going to be revealed for us.
For the eager expectation of the creation is waiting for the manifestation of the sons of God.
For the creation was made subject to futility, not willingly, but because of him who subjected it in hope.
Because the creation itself will also be freed from the bondage of corruption into the liberty of the glory of the children of God.
For we know that the whole creation is groaning and travailing together until now.
And not only so, but also ourselves who have the first fruit of the Spirit. And we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for adoption, the redemption of our body.
For we were saved to hope. But hope that is seen is not hope. For what is seen, why also hope for that?
But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait through patience.
And likewise also the Spirit helps our weaknesses, for we know not what we would pray for as we ought, but the Spirit itself intercedes for us with inexpressible groanings.
And he who searches the hearts knows what is the mentality of the Spirit, because he appeals to God for the sanctified.
And we know that all things work together for good to those who love God, who are the called according to purpose.
Because whom he foreknew, he also predestined to be of similar nature of the form of his Son, in order for him to be the firstborn son among many brothers.
And whom he predestined, these he also called, and whom he called, these he also made righteous, and whom he made righteous, these he also glorified.
What then will we say to these things? If God is for us, who is against us?
He who did not even spare his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how will he not also give us all things with him?
Who will accuse against the chosen of God? God is he who makes righteous.
Who is he who will condemn? It is Christ who died, but more, who also was raised up, who also is at the right hand of God, who also appeals for us.
Who will separate us from the love of Christ? Will tribulation, or restriction, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword?
Just as it is written, For thy sake we are killed the whole day long. We are considered as sheep of slaughter.
But in all these things we are more than conquerors through him who loved us.
For I am persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor agents, nor principal positions, nor powers, nor things that have come, nor things that are coming,
nor height, nor depth, nor any other creation, will be able to separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

I say the truth in Christ, I do not lie, my conscience testifying to me in the Holy Spirit,
that great distress is in me, and unceasing sorrow in my heart.
For I wished I myself to be accursed from the Christ, for my brothers, my kinsmen according to flesh,
who are Israelites, of whom is the adoption, and the glory, and the covenants, and the lawgiving, and the divine service, and the promises,
of whom are the fathers, and from whom (according to flesh) is the Christ, God who is over all is blessed into the ages. Truly.
But it is not as that the word of God has failed. For all those from Israel, these are not Israel,
nor, because they are Abraham's seed, are they all children, rather, In Isaac a seed will be called for thee.
That is, the children of the flesh, these are not children of God, instead, the children of the promise are reckoned for seed.
At this time I will come, and there will be a son by Sarah.
And not only so, but also Rebecca having bed from one man, our father Isaac
(for not yet having been born, nor having done anything good or bad, that the purpose of God according to selection might remain, not from works, but from him who calls),
it was said to her, The older will serve the younger.
As it is written, Jacob I loved, but Esau I regarded inferior.
What will we say then? Is there injustice from God? May it not happen!
For he says to Moses, I will be merciful to whom I may be merciful, and I will be compassionate to whomever I may be compassionate.
So then it is not of him who wills, nor of him who runs, but of God who is merciful.
For the scripture says to Pharaoh, For this same thing I raised thee up, that I might display in thee my power, and that my name might be proclaimed in all the earth.
So then he is merciful to whom he will, and whom he will he hardens.
Thou will say to me therefore, Why does he still find fault? For who has resisted his purpose?
Rather, O man, who are thou answering back to God? No, will the thing formed say to him who formed it, Why did thou make me this way?
Or has the potter no right over the clay, from the same lump certainly to make this vessel for esteem, and that for disesteem?
And if God, wanting to show his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much longsuffering vessels of wrath prepared for destruction,
even that he might make known the wealth of his glory upon vessels of mercy, which he previously prepared for glory,
namely us whom he called, not only from Jews but also from Gentiles.
As also he says in Hosea, I will call those not my people, my people, and her who was not beloved, beloved.
And it will be in the place where it was said to them, Ye are not my people, there they will be called, sons of the living God.
And Isaiah cries out concerning Israel, If the number of the sons of Israel may be as the sand of the sea, the remnant will be saved.
Since he is completing and finishing quickly a matter in righteousness, because a matter that has been cut short upon the earth, the Lord will perform.
And just as Isaiah has foretold, Unless the Lord of hosts had left us a seed, we would have become as Sodom, and would have been made like Gomorrah.
What will we say then? That the Gentiles who did not pursue righteousness, attained righteousness, even the righteousness from faith.
But Israel who pursued a law of righteousness, did not arrive to a law of righteousness.
Why? Because it was not from faith but as from works of law. For they stumbled at the stone of stumbling,
just as it is written, Behold, I lay in Zion a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense. And every man who believes in him will not be shamed.

Brothers, truly my heart's desire and my supplication to God for Israel is for salvation.
For I testify to them that they have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge.
For not understanding the righteousness of God, and seeking to establish their own righteousness, they did not submit to the righteousness of God.
For Christ is the end of law for righteousness, to every man who believes.
For Moses writes in the righteousness from the law, that the man that does them will live in them.
Thou should not say in thy heart, Who will ascend into heaven? (that is, to bring Christ down)
or, Who will descend into the abyss? (that is, to bring Christ up from the dead).
that if thou will confess with thy mouth, the Lord Jesus, and will believe in thy heart that God raised him from the dead, thou will be saved.
For a man believes in the heart for righteousness, and he confesses with the mouth for salvation.
For the scripture says, Every man who believes in him will not be shamed.
For there is no distinction of a Jew and also of a Greek, for the same Lord is of all men, being rich toward all those who call upon him.
For every man, whoever may call upon the name of the Lord will be saved.
How then will they call on whom they have not believed? And how will they believe of whom they have not heard? And how will they hear without preaching?
And how will they preach unless they are sent? Just as it is written, How beautiful are the feet of those who proclaim good news of peace, of those who proclaim good news of good things.
But not all were obedient to the good news, for Isaiah says, Lord, who has believed our report?
So faith is from hearing, and hearing by the word of God.
But I say, did they, no, not hear? Rather, Their voice went forth into all the earth, and their sayings to the limits of the inhabited world.
But I say, did Israel, no, not know? First Moses says, I will provoke you to jealousy toward a non-nation. Toward a foolish nation, I will make you angry.
And Isaiah is very bold and says, I was found by those not seeking me. I became manifest to those not asking for me.
But to Israel he says, The whole day I stretched forth my hands to a disobedient and rebellious people.

I say therefore, did God thrust away his people? May it not happen! For I also am an Israelite from the seed of Abraham, of the tribe of Benjamin.
God did not thrust away his people whom he foreknew. Or know ye not what the scripture tells by Elijah? How he encounters God about Israel.
Lord, they have killed thy prophets, and they have torn down thine altars, and I am left alone, and they seek my life.
But what does the divine response say to him? I have reserved for myself seven thousand men who have not bowed a knee to Baal.
So then also at this present time there has become a remnant according to the selection of grace.
And if it is by grace, it is no longer from works, otherwise grace becomes no longer grace. But if it is from works it is no longer grace, otherwise work is no longer work.
What then? What Israel seeks, this it did not obtain. But the chosen obtained it, and the rest were hardened,
eyes not to see, and ears not to hear, until this very day.
And David says, Let their table become for a snare, and for a trap, and for a stumbling block, and for a retribution to them.
Let their eyes be darkened, not to see, and may thou bow down their back always.
I say then, did they stumble so that they would fall? May it not happen! But in their transgression, salvation is to the Gentiles, in order to provoke them to jealousy.
Now if their transgression is wealth of the world, and their failure is wealth of Gentiles, how much more their fullness?
For I speak to you the Gentiles. Inasmuch as I am indeed an apostle of Gentiles, I enhance my ministry,
if somehow I may provoke my flesh to jealousy and may save some of them.
For if the casting away of them is reconciliation of the world, what is the acceptance except life from the dead?
And if the first fruit is holy, the branch is also. And if the root is holy, the branches are also.
And if some of the branches were broken off, and thou, being a wild olive tree, were grafted in among them, and became a joint partaker of the root of the fatness of the olive tree,
do not boast against the branches. But if thou boast, thou do not bear the root, but the root thee.
Thou will therefore say, Branches were broken off so that I might be grafted in.
Correct! They were broken off for their unbelief, and thou stand by thy faith. Be not high-minded but fear,
for if God spared not the natural branches, perhaps neither will he spare thee.
Behold therefore the goodness and the severity of God. Indeed toward those who fell, severity, but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou too will be cut off.
And also those, if they do not continue in their unbelief, will be grafted in, for God is able to graft them in again.
For if thou were cut from what is by nature a wild olive tree, and were grafted contrary to nature into a cultivated olive tree, how much more will these, the natural ones, be grafted into their own olive tree.
For I do not want you, brothers, to be ignorant of this mystery, lest ye should be wise according to yourselves, that a callousness in part has happened to Israel until the fullness of the Gentiles come in.
And so all Israel will be saved, as it is written, The man who delivers will come from Zion, and will turn away impiety from Jacob.
And this is the covenant from me to them when I will take away their sins.
They are indeed enemies toward the good news for your sake, but toward selection, they are beloved for the fathers' sake.
For the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable.
For as ye once were also disobedient to God, but now have received mercy at the disobedience of these,
so also now these have been disobedient for thy mercy, so that they also may receive mercy.
For God has confined all men in disobedience, so that he might be merciful to all.
O the depth of wealth, both of the wisdom and the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways beyond finding out!
For who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who became his counselor?
Or who first gave to him, and it will be repaid to him?
Because from him, and through him, and for him, are all things. To him is the glory into the ages. Truly.

I beseech you therefore, brothers, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, your reasonable service.
And be not conformed to this age, but be ye transformed by the renewal of your mind, for ye to approve what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God.
For I say, through the grace that was given me, to every man who is among you, not to over think beyond what he ought to think, but to think so as to think soundly, as God has apportioned to each man a measure of faith.
For just as we have many body-parts in one body, and all the body-parts have not the same function,
so we, the many, are one body in Christ, and each one body-parts of each other.
And having different gifts according to the grace that was given to us, whether prophecy, according to the proportion of faith;
or service, in the service; or he who teaches, in the teaching;
or he who exhorts, in the exhortation; he who gives, in simplicity; he who leads, in diligence; he who does mercy, in cheerfulness.
Love without hypocrisy, abhorring what is evil, clinging to what is good,
with brotherly love toward each other, affectionate, leading each other in recognition,
not lazy in diligence, being fervent in the Spirit serving the Lord,
rejoicing in hope, enduring tribulation, persevering in prayer,
sharing for the needs of the sanctified, pursuing love for strangers.
Bless those who persecute you. Bless ye and do not curse.
Rejoice with those who rejoice, weep with those who weep,
thinking the same way toward each other, not thinking on lofty things, but accommodating to the lowly. Become not wise according to yourselves,
rendering to no man evil for evil, premeditating things right in the sight of all men.
If possible from you, keeping peace with all men,
not avenging yourselves, beloved, but give place to wrath, for it is written, Vengeance is for me, I will repay, says the Lord.
Therefore if thine enemy is hungry, feed him. If he is thirsty, give him to drink. For by doing this thou will heap coals of fire upon his head.
Be thou not overcome by evil, but overcome evil by good.

Let every soul be subject to offices of authority that rank higher. For there is no office of authority if not by God, and the offices of authority that are by God are those that have been instituted.
So that he who resists the office of authority has opposed the ordinance of God, and those who have opposed will receive condemnation to themselves.
For rulers are not a source of fear to the good works, but to the evil. And do thou desire not to fear the office of authority? Do what is good, and thou will have praise from it.
For he is a helper of God to thee for what is good. But if thou do what is evil, be afraid, for he does not bear the sword in vain. For he is a helper of God, vengeful for wrath to the man who commits evil.
Therefore there is a need to be subordinate, not only because of the wrath, but also because of the conscience.
For because of this ye also fulfill taxes, for they are servants of God being devoted to this same thing.
tax to the man of tax, tribute to the man of tribute, fear to the man of fear, esteem to the man of esteem.
Owe no man anything except to love each other, for he who loves the other has fulfilled law.
For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not murder, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not testify falsely, Thou shall not covet, and if there be any other commandment it is summarized in this saying, in, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
Love works no evil to the neighbor. Therefore love is the fulfillment of law.
And this, knowing the time, that the hour is now for us to awake out of sleep. For our salvation is now nearer than when we believed.
The night has advanced and the day has approached. Let us therefore cast off the works of darkness, and let us put on the weapons of light.
Let us walk decently as in the day, not in revelry and drunkenness, not in beddings and wantonness, not in strife and envy.
But clothe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no forethought for lusts of the flesh.

But the man who is weak in the faith, do not receive for arguments of opinions.
One man has faith to eat all things, but he who is weak eats vegetables.
The man who eats should not disdain the man who does not eat, and the man who does not eat should not criticize the man who eats, for God has received him.
Who are thou who criticizes the servant of another? To his own lord he stands or falls. And he will be made to stand, for God is able to make him stand.
One man prefers one day above another, another man prefers every day. Let each man be fully persuaded in his own mind.
He who regards the day, regards it for the Lord. And he who does not regard the day, for the Lord he does not regard it. And he who eats, eats for the Lord, for he expresses thanks to God. And he who does not eat, for the Lord he does not eat, and expresses thanks to God.
For none of us lives to himself, and no man dies to himself.
For both if we live, we live for the Lord, and if we die, we die for the Lord. Both if we live and if we die, therefore, we are the Lord's.
For because of this Christ both died and arose, and he became alive so that he might be Lord over both the dead and the living.
But why do thou criticize thy brother? Or also why do thou disdain thy brother? For we will all stand before the judgment seat of Christ.
For it is written, I live, says the Lord, that every knee will bow to me, and every tongue will confess to God.
So then each of us will give account about himself to God.
Let us not therefore criticize each other any more, but judge ye this instead, not to place a stumbling block to the brother, or a snare.
I know and am persuaded in the Lord Jesus, that nothing is profane by itself, except to him who regards anything to be profane. To that man it is profane.
For if thy brother is distressed because of food, thou no longer walk according to love. Do not destroy with thy food that man for whom Christ died.
Therefore do not let your good be maligned.
For the kingdom of God is not eating and drinking, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit.
For he who serves Christ in these things is acceptable to God, and approved by men.
So then we should pursue the things of peace, and the things of constructiveness for each other.
Do not tear down the work of God because of food. All things indeed are clean, but it is wrong to the man who eats through hindrance.
It is good not to eat meats, nor to drink wine, nor in whatever thy brother stumbles against, or is caused to stumble, or becomes weak.
The faith thou have, have in relation to thyself before God. Blessed is the man not condemning himself in what he allows.
But he who doubts is condemned if he eats, because it is not from faith, and everything that is not from faith is sin.

Now we the strong ought to bear the weaknesses of the frail, and not to please ourselves.
Let each of us please his neighbor for what is good toward edification.
For Christ also did not please himself, but as it is written, The reproaches of those who reproached thee fell upon me.
For as many things as were written previously were written for our learning, so that through perseverance and through the encouragement of the scriptures we might have hope.
Now may the God of perseverance and of encouragement grant you to think the same way among each other, in accord with Christ Jesus,
so that unanimously, with one mouth, ye may glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore receive ye each other, just as Christ also received you for the glory of God.
And I say, Christ Jesus became a helper of men of circumcision, for the sake of God's truth (in order to confirm the promises of the fathers),
and the Gentiles, for the sake of mercy, to glorify God, as it is written, Because of this I will give thanks to thee among Gentiles, and will sing to thy name.
And again he says, Rejoice, O Gentiles, with his people.
And again, Praise ye the Lord all nations, and let all the peoples praise him.
And again, Isaiah says, There will be the root of Jesse, and he who arises to reign over Gentiles. In him Gentiles will hope.
Now may the God of hope fill you with all joy and peace in believing, for ye to abound in hope in the power of the Holy Spirit.
And I also myself am persuaded about you, my brothers, that ye yourselves are also full of goodness, filled with all knowledge, able also to admonish others.
But I wrote more boldly to you, brothers, in part, as reminding you because of the grace that was given to me by God,
for me to be a minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, serving the good news of God like a priest, so that the offering up of the Gentiles might become acceptable, being sanctified in the Holy Spirit.
I have therefore a boast in Christ Jesus in things toward God.
For I will not dare to speak anything of which Christ did not accomplish through me for the obedience of Gentiles, by word and work,
in the power of signs and wonders, in the power of a Spirit of God, so that for me, from Jerusalem and all around as far as Illyricum, to fully preach the good news of Christ.
And thus having aspired to proclaim the good news not where Christ was already named, so that I would not build upon a foundation belonging to another man,
but, as it is written, They will see to whom it was not reported about him, and they will understand who have not heard.
Therefore also, I was delayed these many times coming to you.
But now, having no more place in these regions, and having a great desire from many years to come to you,
whenever I go to Spain I will come to you. For I hope to see you while passing through, and there to be helped on the way by you, if first I may be partly satisfied from you.
But now I am going to Jerusalem serving the sanctified.
For Macedonia and Achaia were pleased to make a certain participation for the poor of the sanctified at Jerusalem.
For they were pleased. And they are debtors of them, for if the Gentiles were partakers in their spiritual things, they are obligated also to serve them in the carnal things.
Having therefore completed this, and having sealed this fruit for them, I will depart by you to Spain.
And I know that when I come to you, I will come in the fullness of the blessing of the good news of the Christ.
Now I beseech you, brothers, by our Lord Jesus Christ and by the love of the Spirit, to strive with me in prayers to God for me.
So that I may be rescued from those who are disobedient in Judea, and that my service for Jerusalem may become acceptable to the sanctified,
so that I may come to you in joy through the will of God, and be rested with you.
And the God of peace is with you all. Truly.

Now I commend to you our sister Phoebe who is a helper of the congregation at Cenchreae,
so that ye may welcome her in the Lord worthily of the sanctified, and that ye provide for her in whatever matter she may have need of you, for she also became a helper of many, and of me myself.
Salute Prisca and Aquila my co-workmen in Christ Jesus
(who laid down their own neck for my life, to whom not only I thank, but also all the congregations of the Gentiles), and the congregation associated with their house.
Salute Epaenetus my beloved who is the first fruit of Achaia for Christ.
Salute Mary who labored many things for us.
Salute Andronicus and Junias, my kinsmen and my fellow prisoners who are notable men among the apostles, who also became in Christ before me.
Salute Ampliatus my beloved in the Lord.
Salute Urbanus our co-workman in Christ, and Stachys my beloved.
Salute Apelles, a man reliable in Christ. Salute the men from those of Aristobulus.
Salute Herodion my kinsman. Salute the men from those of Narcissus who are in the Lord.
Salute Tryphaena and Tryphosa, the women who labor in the Lord. Salute the beloved Persis who labored many things in the Lord.
Salute Rufus the chosen in the Lord, and his mother and mine.
Salute Asyncritus, Phlegon, Hermes, Patrobas, Hermas, and the brothers with them.
Salute Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas, and all the sanctified with them.
Salute each other by a holy kiss. The congregations of Christ salute you.
Now I beseech you, brothers, watch out for those who make the divisions and the stumbling blocks, contrary to the doctrine that ye learned, and turn away from them.
For such kind serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belly. And by their smooth words and elegant speech they deceive the hearts of the naive.
For your obedience reached to all men. Therefore I rejoice over you, but I want you to be indeed wise in the good and pure in the evil.
And the God of peace will crush Satan under your feet shortly. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with you.
Timothy my co-workman, and Lucius and Jason and Sosipater, my kinsmen, salute you.
I Tertius, the man who transcribed the letter, salute you in the Lord.
Gaius my host, and of the whole congregation, salutes you. Erastus, the manager of the city, salutes you, and Quartus the brother.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with all of you. Truly.
Now to him who is able to establish you according to my good news, and the preaching of Jesus Christ according to a revelation of the mystery that has been kept secret for eternal times,
but that was now revealed, and by prophetic scriptures, according to a commandment of the eternal God that was made known to all the nations for obedience of faith,
to the only wise God through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory into the ages. Truly.

I Corinthians

Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Sosthenes the brother,
to the congregation of God that is at Corinth, to called men, to holy men who have been sanctified in Christ Jesus with all in every place who call upon the name of our the Lord Jesus Christ-both ours and theirs.
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God always about you, for the grace of God that was given you in Christ Jesus,
that in everything ye were enriched in him, in all speech and in all knowledge.
Just as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you,
so that ye come behind in not one gift, waiting for the revealing of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who will also confirm you until the end, irreproachable in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
God is faithful through whom ye were called for the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
Now I beseech you, brothers, through the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same thing, and there be no divisions among you, but ye may be thoroughly prepared in the same mind and in the same understanding.
For it was declared to me about you, my brothers, by those of Chloe, that there are contentions among you.
Now I say this. That each of you actually say, I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ.
Has Christ been divided? Was Paul crucified for you, or were ye immersed in the name of Paul?
I thank God that I immersed none of you except Crispus and Gaius,
lest some man should say that I immersed in my name.
And I also immersed the household of Stephanas. Besides, I know not whether I immersed any other.
For Christ sent me not to immerse, but to preach the good news, not in wisdom of speech lest the cross of Christ would be emptied.
For the message of the cross is of course foolishness to those who are perishing, but to us who are being saved it is a power of God.
For it is written, I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and I will frustrate the understanding of those of understanding.
Where is a wise man? Where is a scholar? Where is a researcher of this age? Did not God make foolish the wisdom of this world?
For since in the wisdom of God the world did not know God through its wisdom, it pleased God through the foolishness of preaching to save those who believe.
And because Jews demand a sign and Greeks search for wisdom,
but we proclaim Christ crucified, it is truly to Jews a stumbling-block and to Gentiles foolishness.
But to them, to the called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ is the power of God and the wisdom of God.
Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men, and the weak thing of God is stronger than men.
For notice your calling, brothers, that not many are wise according to flesh, not many powerful, not many eminent.
But God chose the foolish things of the world, so that he might humiliate the wise, and God chose the weak things of the world, so that he might humiliate the powerful.
And God chose the common things of the world, and the disdained things, and the things that are not, so that he might make useless the things that are,
so that no flesh may boast before God.
But ye are his, in Christ Jesus, who became for us wisdom from God, and righteousness and sanctification and redemption,
so that, just as it is written, He who boasts, let him boast in the Lord.

And I, brothers, when I came to you, came not in eminence of speech or of wisdom proclaiming the testimony of God to you.
For I determined not to know anything among you except Jesus Christ, even this crucified man.
And I was with you in weakness, and in fear, and in much trembling.
And my speech and my preaching were not in persuasive words of human wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power,
so that your faith would not be in wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
But we speak wisdom among the fully developed, but not a wisdom of this age, nor of the rulers of this age who come to nothing.
But we speak a wisdom of God in a hidden mystery, which God predestined before the ages for our glory,
which none of the rulers of this age have known. For if they had known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.
But as it is written, What an eye has not seen, and an ear has not heard, and have not arisen in a heart of a man, are things that God prepared for those who love him.
But God disclosed it to us through his Spirit, for the Spirit searches all things, even the deep things of God.
For what man knows the things of the man, except the spirit of the man in him? And so nobody knows the things of God except the Spirit of God.
But we did not receive the spirit of the world, but the Spirit from God, so that we might know the things graciously given to us by God.
Which things also we speak, not in things learned from mankind, in words of wisdom, but in things learned from the Holy Spirit, comparing spiritual things with spiritual things.
Now the natural man does not accept the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness to him, and he is unable to understand because they are evaluated spiritually.
But truly the spiritual man evaluates all things, but he himself is evaluated by none.
For who has known the mind of the Lord that he will stand with him? But we have the mind of Christ.

And I, brothers, could not speak to you as to spiritual, but as to carnal, as to the childlike in Christ.
I gave you milk to drink and not solid food, for ye were not yet able. But not even yet are ye able,
for ye are still carnal. For whereas among you is envy and strife and divisions, are ye not carnal and walk according to man?
For while one may say, I am of Paul, and another, I am of Apollos, are ye not carnal?
Who therefore is Paul and who is Apollos? But rather helpers through whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to each man.
I planted, Apollos watered, but God caused growth.
So then neither is he who plants anything, nor he who waters, but God who causes growth.
Now he who plants and he who waters are one, but each man will receive his own payment according to his own labor.
For we are co-workmen of God. Ye are a tillage of God, an edifice of God.
According to the grace of God that was given to me, as a wise master builder, I laid a foundation and another man is building on it. But let each man take heed how he is building on it.
For no man can lay another foundation besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ.
And if any man builds upon this foundation, gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, straw,
each man's work will become manifest. For the day will make it known, because it is revealed by fire. And the fire will test each man's work of what kind it is.
If any man's work that he built on will remain, he will receive benefit.
If any man's work will be burned, he will suffer loss, but he himself will be saved, but so as through fire.
Know ye not that ye are a temple of God and the Spirit of God dwells in you?
If any man destroys the temple of God, God will destroy this man, for the temple of God is holy, which ye are.
Let not one man deceive himself. If any man among you seems to be wise in this age, let him become foolish so that he may become wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness before God. For it is written, He who catches the wise in their craftiness,
and again, The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise that they are vain.
Therefore let not one man boast in men. For all things are yours,
whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things coming, all are yours,
and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's.

Thus let a man regard us as of helpers of Christ, and managers of mysteries of God.
And beyond that, it is sought in managers that any man should be found faithful.
But it is a very small thing to me that I might be appraised by you or by a day of mankind. Yet neither do I appraise myself,
for I know nothing on myself. Yet I have not been made righteous in this, but he who appraises me is the Lord.
Therefore do not judge anything before the time, until the Lord comes who will both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make public the deliberations of the hearts. And then praise will come to each man from God.
Now these things, brothers, I applied to myself and Apollos for your sakes, so that in us ye might learn not to think above that which is written, so that ye may not be puffed up, one over the one against the other.
For who makes thee different? And what have thou that thou did not receive? And also if thou received it, why do thou boast as not having received it?
Already ye are filled. Already ye have become rich. Ye reigned without us, and O that ye did indeed reign, so that we also might reign with you.
For I think God has exhibited us the apostles least, as men sentenced to die, because we became a spectacle to the world, both to agents and to men.
We are foolish for the sake of Christ, but ye are wise in Christ. We are weak, but ye are strong. Ye are esteemed, but we are disreputable.
As far as the present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are ill clothed, and are treated roughly, and are homeless.
And we toil, working with our own hands. Being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we endure;
being slandered, we entreat. We became as trash of the world, an offscouring of all things, until now.
I do not write these things shaming you, but I warn you as my beloved children.
For though ye have countless instructors in Christ, yet not many fathers. For in Christ Jesus I begot you through the good news.
I beseech you therefore, become followers of me.
Because of this I sent Timothy to you, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who will remind you of my ways in Christ, just as I teach everywhere in every congregation.
But as of me not coming to you, some men are puffed up.
But I will come to you shortly, if the Lord should will, and I will know, not the word of those who are puffed up, but the power.
For the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power.
What do ye want? Should I come to you with a rod, or in love and a spirit of meekness?

Fornication is actually heard among you, and such fornication that is not even named among the Gentiles, for some man to have his father's wife.
And ye are puffed up and did not rather mourn, so that he who committed this deed might be taken away from the midst of you.
For I truly, as being absent in the body but present in the spirit, I have already, as though present, judged the man who committed this thing this way.
In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, when ye are gathered together, and my spirit with the power of our Lord Jesus Christ,
to deliver such a man to Satan for destruction of the flesh, so that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus.
Your boasting is not good. Know ye not that a little leaven leavens the whole lump?
Purge out the old leaven, so that ye may be a new lump, since ye are unleavened. For also Christ our Passover was sacrificed for us.
Therefore we should feast, not by old leaven, nor by leaven of evil and wickedness, but by non-leaven of sincerity and truth.
I wrote to you in the letter not to associate with fornicators,
and not at all with the fornicators of this world, or with greedy men, or with predators, or with idolaters, since then ye would need to go out of the world.
But now I write to you not to associate if any man who is called a brother is a fornicator, or a greedy man, or an idolater, or a slanderer, or a drunkard, or a predator, not even to eat with such kind.
For what is in me to also judge those outside? Do ye not judge those inside?
But God judges those outside. And ye yourselves shall drive out the evil man from you.

Dare any of you, having a matter against the other, go to law before the unrighteous and not before the sanctified?
Or know ye not that the sanctified will judge the world? And if the world is judged by you, are ye unworthy of very small legal disputes?
Know ye not that we will judge agents? Then why not mundane things?
Indeed therefore whenever ye have mundane legal disputes, men who are disdained by the church, these ye seat to judge.
I speak shame about you. So there is not among you not even one wise man who will be able to arbitrate between his brother?
But brother goes to law against brother, and this before unbelievers?
Now therefore it is indeed altogether a defeat for you because ye have legal disputes against yourselves. Why not rather be wronged? Why not rather be defrauded?
Instead ye do wrong, and defraud, and these things to brothers.
Or know ye not that the unrighteous will not inherit the kingdom of God? Be not led astray. Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate men, nor homosexuals,
nor greedy men, nor thieves, nor drunkards, nor the slanderous, nor the predatory will inherit the kingdom of God.
And some of you were these things, but ye were washed, but ye were sanctified, but ye were made righteous in the name of the Lord Jesus, and in the Spirit of our God.
All things are lawful for me, but not all things are expedient. All things are lawful for me, but I will not be brought under control by anything.
The foods are for the belly and the belly for foods, but God will abolish both this and these things. But the body is not for fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the body.
And God both raised up the Lord and will raise us up through his power.
Know ye not that your bodies are body-parts of Christ? Therefore, having taken the body-parts of the Christ, should I make them body-parts of a harlot? May it not happen!
Or know ye not that he who is joined to a harlot is one body? For, The two, he says, will be in one flesh.
But he who is joined to the Lord is one spirit.
Flee fornication. Every sin, whatever a man may do, is outside the body, but he who fornicates sins against his own body.
Or know ye not that your body is a temple of the Holy Spirit in you, which ye have from God? And ye are not your own,
for ye were bought with a price. Therefore glorify God in your body and your spirit, which is of God.

Now concerning the things of which ye wrote to me. It is good for a man not to touch a woman.
But because of fornications, let each man have his own wife, and let each woman have her own husband.
Let the husband render the goodwill owed to the wife, and likewise also the wife to the husband.
The wife has not the right of her private body, but the husband, and likewise also the husband has not the right of his private body, but the wife.
Do not defraud each other except from agreement for a time, so that ye may have time for fasting and prayer. And come together again for the same thing, so that Satan not tempt you because of your lack of self-control.
But I say this from concession not from commandment.
For I wish all men to be even as myself. However each man has his own gift from God, one in this way, and another after that.
But I say to the unmarried and to the widows, it is good for them if they remain even as I.
But if they have no self-control they should marry, for it is better to marry than to burn.
And to those who are married, I do not command but the Lord. The wife is not to separate from her husband.
But even if she separates, she shall remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband. And a husband is not to leave his wife.
But to the rest I say, not the Lord. If any brother has an unbelieving wife, and this woman consents to dwell with him, he should not leave her.
And whichever woman has an unbelieving husband, and he consents to dwell with her, she should not leave him.
For the unbelieving husband has been sanctified by the wife, and the unbelieving wife has been sanctified by the husband, then otherwise your children are unclean, but now they are holy.
But if the unbeliever separates, he shall separate. The brother or the sister has not been bound in such things. And God has called us to peace.
For how do thou know, O wife, whether thou will save thy husband? Or how will thou know, O husband, whether thou will save thy wife?
Except, as God has distributed to each man, as the Lord has called each, so let him walk. And so I command in all the congregations.
Was any man called circumcised? He should not become uncircumcised. Was any man called in uncircumcision? He should not be circumcised.
Circumcision is nothing and uncircumcision is nothing, instead, the keeping of God's commandments.
Each man, in the situation in which he was called, in this he should remain.
Were thou called being a bondman? It should not concern thee. However if also thou are able to become free, take advantage of it instead.
For he who was called in the Lord a bondman is a freedman of the Lord. Likewise also he who was called a free man is a bondman of Christ.
Ye were bought with a price, become not bondmen of men.
Brothers, each man, in what he was called, should remain in this before God.
Now concerning the virgins I have no commandment of the Lord, but I give an opinion, as having obtained mercy from the Lord to be trustworthy.
Are thou bound to a wife? Do not seek separation. Are thou free from a wife? Do not seek a wife.
But also if thou did marry thou have not sinned, and if the virgin married she has not sinned. Yet such kind will have stress in the flesh, but I spare you.
But this I say, brothers, the time is shortened. It is the remaining, so that also those who have wives may be as not having,
and those who weep, as not weeping, and those who rejoice, as not rejoicing, and those who buy, as not possessing,
and those who use this world, as not making full use, for the form of this world passes away.
But I want you to be without worry. The unmarried man cares for things of the Lord, how he will please the Lord.
But he who is married cares for things of the world, how he will please his wife.
And the wife and the virgin are differentiated. The unmarried woman is concerned for the things of the Lord, so that she may be holy both in body and in spirit. But she who is married is concerned for the things of the world, how she will please her husband.
And I say this for your own benefit, not that I may cast restraint upon you, but for what is respectable and assiduous toward the Lord, undistracted.
But if any man thinks to behave improperly toward his virgin, if it is past the best time, and so ought to happen, she should do what she wants, she does not sin, they should marry.
But he who stands firm in his heart, not having necessity, but has power based upon his own will, and has decided this in his heart, to keep his own celibacy, does well.
And therefore he who gives in marriage does well, but he who does not give in marriage does better.
A wife is bound by law as long a time as her husband lives, but also if the husband should sleep, she is free to be married to whom she desires, only in the Lord.
But she is more blessed if she remains this way according to my opinion. And I also seem to have Spirit of God.

Now about the things sacrificed to idols. We know that all have knowledge. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up.
If any man presumes to know anything, he knows nothing yet as he ought to know.
But if any man loves God, this man is known by him.
Therefore about eating the things sacrificed to idols, we know that an idol is nothing in the world, and that there is no other God except one.
For also since there are things called gods, whether in heaven or on the earth, as there are many gods and many lords,
yet to us there is one God, the Father, from whom are all things, and we for him, and one Lord, Jesus Christ, through whom are all things, and we through him.
Nevertheless the knowledge is not in all men, but some, with conscience of the idol until now, eat as sacrificed to idols, and their weak conscience is defiled.
But food does not present us to God, for neither if we eat are we ahead, nor if we do not eat are we behind.
But take heed lest somehow this privilege of yours becomes a stumbling-block to those who are weak.
For if some man sees thee, who has knowledge, dining in an idol-temple, will not his conscience, being weak, be strengthened to eat things sacrificed to idols?
And by thy knowledge the brother, being weak, will be ruined, for whom Christ died.
And sinning this way against the brothers, and wounding their weak conscience, ye sin against Christ.
Therefore if food causes my brother to stumble, I will no, not eat meat into the age, so that I may not cause my brother to stumble.

Am I not an apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord? Are ye not my work in the Lord?
If I am not an apostle to others, yet at least I am to you, for ye are the seal of my apostleship in the Lord.
My defense to those who examine me is this.
Have we no, not a right to eat and to drink?
Have we no, not a right to lead about a sister wife, as also the other apostles, and the brothers of the Lord, and Cephas?
Or have only I and Barnabas no right not to be occupied earning a living?
Who ever enlists in an army at his own wage? Who plants a vineyard and does not eat from the fruit of it? Or who feeds a flock and does not eat from the milk of the flock?
Do I say these things according to man, or does not the law also say these things?
For it is written in the law of Moses thou shall not muzzle an ox threshing grain. Is God concerned about oxen,
or does he speak altogether for our sake? For our sake, for it was written, He who plows ought to plow with hope, and he who threshes with his hope, with hope to share.
If we sowed spiritual things to you, is it a great thing if we will reap your carnal things?
If others are partakers of the right from you, are not we more? Nevertheless we did not use this right, but we cover all things, so that we may not give any hindrance to the good news of the Christ.
Know ye not that those being employed at the sacred things eat from the temple, and those who serve at the altar are partakers at the altar?
And so the Lord commanded those who proclaim the good news to live from the good news.
But I have used none of these things, and I did not write these things so that it should be done to me this way. For it is good for me rather to die, than that any man should make my boasting empty.
For if I preach the good news, it is not a source of pride for me, for an obligation is laid upon me. And woe is to me if I do not preach the good news.
For if I do this voluntarily, I have a reward, but if involuntarily, I have been entrusted with a commission.
What then is my reward? That, while preaching the good news, I may make the good news of the Christ without charge, in order not to make full use of my right in the good news.
For although being free from all men, I made myself a servant to all, so that I might gain the more.
And to the Jews I became as a Jew, so that I might gain Jews, to those under law, as under law, so that I might gain those under law,
to those without law, as without law (not being without law to God, but within law to Christ), so that I might gain men without law.
To the weak I became as weak, so that I might gain the weak. I have become all things to all men, so that by all means I might save some.
And I do this for sake of the good news, so that I might become a fellow participant of it.
Know ye not that those who run in an arena, indeed all run, but one receives the prize? So run that ye may seize it.
And every man who strives for mastery exercises self-control in all things. Indeed therefore those men do it so that they might obtain a perishable crown, but we an imperishable.
I therefore run this way, not as aimlessly. I fight this way, not as flaying air.
But I give my body a black eye and subdue it, lest somehow having preached to others, I myself might become disqualified.

But I want you not to be ignorant, brothers, that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea,
and all in Moses were immersed in the cloud and in the sea.
And they all ate the same spiritual food,
and they all drank the same spiritual drink, for they drank from a spiritual rock that followed them. And the rock was the Christ.
However with most of them God was not well pleased, for they were strewn in the wilderness.
But these things became our examples, for us not to be men who lust for evil things as those also lusted.
Neither become ye idolaters as some of them, as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to revel.
Nor should we fornicate as some of them fornicated, and twenty-three thousand fell in one day.
Nor should we challenge the Christ as some of them also challenged, and were destroyed by the serpents.
And ye should not grumble as some of them grumbled, and were destroyed by the destroyer.
Now all these things happened to those men for examples, and they were written for our admonition, to whom the ends of the ages came.
Therefore let him who seems to stand take heed lest he fall.
No temptation has taken you except is common to man. But God is faithful who will not allow you to be tempted above what ye are able, but with the temptation will also make the way to escape, to enable you to endure.
Therefore, my beloved, flee from idolatry.
I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say.
The cup of the blessing that we bless, is it not a participation of the blood of the Christ? The bread that we break, is it not a participation of the body of the Christ?
Because we, the many, are one bread, one body, for we are all partakers of the one bread.
Look at Israel according to flesh. Those who eat the sacrifices, are they not partakers of the altar?
What therefore do I say, that an idol is anything, or that a sacrifice to an idol is anything?
Rather, that which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to demons and not to God, and I do not want you to become partakers of demons.
Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup of demons. Ye cannot be partakers of a table of the Lord, and of a table of demons.
Or do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than he?
All things are permitted for me, but not all things are expedient. All things are permitted for me, but not all things are constructive.
Let not one man seek that of himself, but each man that of the other.
Eat everything being sold in a meat market, inquiring of nothing because of the conscience,
for the earth is the Lord's, and the fullness of it.
If any of those unbelievers invites you, and ye want to go, eat everything being set before you, inquiring of nothing because of the conscience.
But if any man says to you, This is a sacrifice to an idol, do not eat for the sake of that man who informed, and the conscience, for the earth is the Lord's, and the fullness of it.
And I say conscience, not the one of himself, but the one of the other man. For why is my liberty judged by another conscience?
If I partake with thankfulness, why am I maligned about which I express thanks?
Therefore whether ye eat, or drink, or anything ye do, do all to the glory of God.
Become ye inoffensive both to Jews and to Greeks, and to the church of God,
just as I also strive to please in all things for all men, not seeking my own advantage, but that of the many, so that they may be saved.

Become ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ.
Now I praise you, brothers, that ye remember me in all things and keep the traditions, just as I delivered them to you.
But I want you to know that the head of every man is the Christ, and the head of a woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God.
Every man praying or prophesying having something upon his head dishonors his head.
But every woman praying or prophesying with her head uncovered dishonors her head, for it is one and the same thing as the woman who has been shaven.
For if a woman is not covered, let her also shear herself. But if it is an ugly thing for a woman to shear herself or be shaven, she should be covered.
For a man indeed ought not to cover his head, being an image and glory of God, but woman is a glory of man.
For man is not from woman, but woman from man.
For also man was not created for the woman, but woman for the man.
Because of this the woman ought to have authority over her head, because of the agents.
Nevertheless, neither is man independent of woman, nor woman independent of man, in the Lord.
For just as the woman is from the man, so also the man is through the woman. But all things are from God.
Judge ye among yourselves, is it proper for a woman to pray to God uncovered?
Or does not nature itself teach you that if a man actually wears long hair it is a disgrace to him?
But if a woman wears long hair, it is a glory to her, because her hair has been given for a cloak.
But if any man appears to be a lover of strife, we have no such custom, nor the congregations of God.
Now in this that is commanded, I do not praise you, because ye do not assemble for the better but for the worse.
For indeed first, when ye come together in a congregation, I hear divisions are present among you, and I partly believe it.
For there must also be factions among you, so that the genuine may become apparent among you.
When therefore ye come together in the same place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper.
For each man proceeds to eat his own meal, and one is hungry and another is drunken.
For have ye no houses to eat and to drink in? Or do ye disparage the church of God, and humiliate those not having? What shall I say to you? Shall I praise you in this? I do not praise you.
For I received from the Lord what I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus in the night in which he was betrayed took bread,
and having expressed thanks, he broke in pieces, and said, Take ye, eat, this is my body broken for you. This do ye for my memorial.
Likewise also the cup after the supper, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood. This do, as often as ye drink it, for my memorial.
For as often as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, ye proclaim the Lord's death until he comes.
Therefore whoever may eat this bread or drink the cup of the Lord unworthily of the Lord, will be guilty of the body and the blood of the Lord.
But let a man examine himself, and let him so eat of the bread, and drink of the cup.
For he who eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks condemnation to himself, not discerning the body of the Lord.
Because of this many are weak and sickly among you, and a considerable sleep.
But if we were discerning ourselves we would not be judged.
But when we are judged by the Lord, we are chastened so that we may not be condemned with the world.
Therefore, my brothers, when ye come together to eat, await each other.
And if any man is hungry, let him eat at home so that ye may not come together for condemnation. And the rest I will set in order as soon as I come.

Now concerning the spiritual things, brothers, I do not want you to be ignorant.
Ye know that, while Gentiles, ye were being carried away to the voiceless idols, as ye were led.
Therefore I make known to you, that no man speaking by the Spirit of God says, Jesus is accursed, and no man can say, Jesus is Lord, except by the Holy Spirit.
Now there are varieties of gifts, but the same Spirit.
And there are varieties of services, and the same Lord.
And there are varieties of functions, but it is the same God who works all in all.
But the manifestation of the Spirit is given to each man toward that which is beneficial.
For to one, the word of wisdom is given through the Spirit, and to another, the word of knowledge according to the same Spirit,
to a different man, faith by the same Spirit, and to another, gifts of healings by the same Spirit,
and to another, workings of miracles, and to another, prophecy, and to another, discerning of spirits, and to a different man, kinds of tongues, and to another, the interpretation of tongues.
But the one and the same Spirit works all these things, distributing to each man individually as it wills.
For just as the body is one and has many parts, and all the parts of the body, being many, are one body, so also is the Christ.
For also by one Spirit we are all immersed into one body, whether Jews or Greeks, whether bondmen or freemen, and we were all made to drink into one Spirit.
For the body also is not one part, but many.
If the foot should say, Because I am not a hand I am not of the body, it is not by this not of the body.
And if the ear should say, Because I am not an eye I am not of the body, it is not by this not of the body.
If the whole body were an eye, where would be the hearing? If the whole were hearing, where would be the smelling?
But now God has placed the parts, each one of them, in the body just as he intended.
And if they were all one part, where would be the body?
But now of course there are many body-parts, but one body.
And the eye cannot say to the hand, I have no need of thee, nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of you.
Instead, much more the parts of the body that seem to be more feeble are necessary.
And those things of the body presumed to be without esteem, we place around these more abundant worth. And our unpresentable parts have more abundant propriety,
whereas our presentable parts have no need. Instead, God united the body together, having given more abundant worth to the part that lacks,
so that there would be no schisms in the body, but that the parts would have the same care for each other.
And if one part suffers, all the parts suffer together, or one part is honored, all the parts rejoice together.
Now ye are the body of Christ, and body-parts individually.
And in the church God has placed men who are first apostles, secondly prophets, thirdly teachers, then miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, administrations, kinds of tongues.
Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers? Do all do miracles?
Do all have gifts of healing? Do all speak with tongues? Do all interpret?
But be zealous for the better gifts. And yet I show you a more excellent way.

If I speak with the tongues of men and of agents, but have not love, I have become sounding brass, or a clashing cymbal.
And if I have prophecy, and know all mysteries and all knowledge, and if I have all faith so as to remove mountains, and have not love, I am nothing.
And if I dole out all things possessed by me, and if I deliver my body so that I may be burned, and have not love, I benefit nothing.
Love is patient and is kind. Love does not envy. Love does not brag, and is not puffed up.
It does not behave improperly, does not seek the things of itself, is not made sharp, does not contemplate evil,
does not rejoice in wrong but rejoices in the truth,
covers all things, believes all things, hopes all things, endures all things.
Love never fails. But whether prophecies, they will be abolished, whether tongues, they will cease, whether knowledge, it will be abolished.
But we know in part, and we prophesy in part,
but when the perfect comes, then what is in part will be abolished.
When I was a child, I spoke as a child, I understood as a child, I reasoned as a child, but when I became a man, I abolished the childish things.
For now we see by polished metal, in dimness, but then face to face. Now I know in part, but then I will know just as also I was known.
And now remain faith, hope, love, these three, but the greater of these is love.

Pursue love, and be zealous for the spiritual things, but more that ye may prophesy.
For he who speaks in a tongue speaks not to men, but to God, for no man hears, but in spirit he speaks mysteries.
But he who prophesies speaks to men edification and encouragement and comfort.
He who speaks in a tongue builds himself up, but he who prophesies builds up the congregation.
Now I want you all to speak in tongues, but more that ye may prophesy. For greater is he who prophesies than he who speaks in tongues, unless he interprets, so that the congregation may receive edification.
But now, brothers, if I come to you speaking in tongues, what will I benefit you, unless I would speak to you either in a revelation, or in knowledge, or in prophesying, or in doctrine?
Likewise lifeless things that give a sound, whether flute or harp, if they give no distinction in the sounds, how will it be known what is being piped or harped?
For also if a trumpet gives an uncertain sound, who will prepare himself for battle?
So also ye, unless ye give understandable speech by the tongue, how will that which is spoken be known? For ye will be talking into the air.
Since there are perhaps, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none of them is without significance.
If therefore I know not the force of the voice, I will be a foreigner to him who speaks, and he who speaks will be a foreigner to me.
So also ye, since ye are zealots of spirits, seek so that ye may excel for the edification of the church.
Therefore let him who speaks in a tongue pray that he may interpret.
For if I pray in a tongue my spirit prays, but my intellect is unfruitful.
What is it therefore? I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the intellect also. I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the intellect also.
Otherwise if thou would bless with the spirit, how will the man who fills the place of the unlearned, say the Truly at thy thanksgiving, since he knows not what thou say?
For thou indeed express thanks well, but the other man is not edified.
I thank my God that I speak in tongues more than all of you.
Yet in an assembly I would rather speak five words with my intellect, so that I might also make others understand, than countless words in a tongue.
Brothers, become not children in your thoughts. Instead be childlike in wickedness, but in your thoughts become mature.
In the law it is written, In other tongues and in other lips I will speak to this people, and not even so will they hear me, says the Lord.
Therefore tongues are for a sign, not to those who believe, but to the unbelieving. But prophesying is not to the unbelieving, but to those who believe.
If therefore the whole congregation comes together in the same place, and all speak in tongues, and unlearned or unbelieving men come in, will they not say that ye are mad?
But if all prophesy, and some unbelieving or unlearned man comes in, he is convicted by all, he is called to account by all.
And so the secrets of his heart are made manifest. And so having fallen down on his face he will worship God, declaring that God is really among you.
What is it therefore, brothers? When ye come together, each of you has a psalm, has a teaching, has a tongue, has a revelation, has an interpretation. Let all things be done for edification.
If any man speaks in a tongue, be according to two, or at the most three, and in succession. And let one interpret.
But if there is no interpreter, let him keep silence in an assembly, and let him speak to himself and to God.
And let two or three prophets speak, and let the other men pass judgment.
But if it should be revealed to another man who is seated, let the first be silent.
For ye can all prophesy one by one, so that all may learn, and all may be encouraged.
And the spirits of prophets are subject to prophets,
for God is not a God of confusion, but of peace.
As in all the churches of the sanctified, let the women keep silent in the churches. For it is not permitted for them to speak, but to be subordinate, as the law also says.
And if they want to learn anything, let them question their own husbands at home, for it is an ugly thing for women to speak in an assembly.
Or did the word of God come forth from you? Or did it come to you only?
If any man presumes to be a prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge what I write to you, that they are commandments of the Lord.
But if any man is ignorant, let him be ignorant.
Therefore brothers, be zealous for prophesying, and do not forbid to speak in tongues.
Let all things be done decently and in order.

And, brothers, I make known to you the good news that I preached to you, which also ye received, and in which ye stand,
by which also ye are saved if ye hold firm that word I preached to you, unless ye believed in vain.
For I delivered to you at first what I also received, that Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures,
and that he was buried, and that he arose on the third day according to the scriptures,
and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve.
Then he appeared to over five hundred brothers at once, of whom the greater part remain until now, but some also slept.
Then he appeared to James, then to all the apostles,
and last of all, as to the untimely birth, he also appeared to me.
For I am the least of the apostles, who am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God.
But by the grace of God I am what I am. And his grace for me did not become empty, but I labored more abundantly than them all, yet not I, but the grace of God with me.
Therefore whether I or those men, so we proclaim, and so ye believed.
Now if Christ is proclaimed that he has risen from the dead, how say some among you that there is no resurrection of the dead?
But if there is no resurrection of the dead, neither has Christ risen.
And if Christ has not risen, then our preaching is empty, and your faith is also empty.
And also we are found false witnesses of God, because we witnessed according to God that he raised up the Christ, whom he did not raise up, if therefore the dead are really not raised.
For if the dead are not raised, neither has Christ been raised.
And if Christ has not been raised, your faith is vain. Ye are still in your sins.
Then also those who slept in Christ have perished.
If we are men who have hoped in Christ in this life only, we are of all men more miserable.
But now Christ has been raised from the dead. He became the first fruit of those who are asleep.
For since death is because of a man, the resurrection of the dead is also because of a man.
For as by Adam all die, so also by Christ all will be made alive.
But each in his own order. Christ the first fruit, then those of Christ at his coming.
Afterwards the end, when he delivers up the kingdom to the God and Father, when he will abolish all rule, and all authority and power.
For he must reign until he will put all his enemies under his feet.
The last enemy abolished is death.
For he subordinated all things under his feet. But when he says that all things have been subordinated, it is clear that he who subordinated all things under him, is excepted.
And when all things are made subordinate to him, then the Son himself will also be made subordinate to him who subordinated all things to him, so that God may be all in all.
Otherwise what will they do who are immersed for the dead? If the dead do not rise at all, why then are they immersed for the dead?
And we, why are we in peril every hour?
By the pride that belongs to you, that I keep in Christ Jesus our Lord, I die daily.
If in respect to men I fought with beasts at Ephesus, what is the benefit to me if the dead are not raised? Let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we die.
Be not led astray. Evil associations corrupt good habits.
Sober up rightly, and do not sin, for some have ignorance of God. I speak shame about you.
But some man will say, How are the dead raised, and with what kind of body do they come?
Thou foolish man, what thou sow is not made alive unless it dies.
And what thou sow, thou do not sow the body that it will become, but a bare grain, if it may happen of wheat, or of some other kind.
But God gives it a body as he wills, and to each of the seeds its own body.
All flesh is not the same flesh, but one of men, and another flesh of beasts, and another of fishes, and another of birds,
and heavenly bodies, and earthly bodies (but the glory of the heavenly is different, and the glory of the earthly is different),
another glory is of the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars, for star differs from star in glory.
So also is the resurrection of the dead. It is sown in the perishable, it is raised in imperishability.
It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory. It is sown in weakness, it is raised in power.
It is sown a natural body, it is raised a spiritual body. There is a natural body, and there is a spiritual body.
And so it is written, The first man Adam developed into a living soul. The last Adam a life giving spirit.
Nevertheless the spiritual is not first, but the natural, then the spiritual.
The first man was of the earth, earthly. The second man is the Lord from heaven.
As is the earthly, such also are the earthly. And as is the heavenly, such also are the heavenly.
And just as we have worn the form of the earthly, we will also wear the form of the heavenly.
Now this I affirm, brothers, that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God, nor does the perishable inherit imperishability.
Behold, I tell you a mystery. We will actually not all sleep, but we will all be transformed,
in an instant, in the blink of an eye, at the last trumpet. For it will sound, and the dead will be raised imperishable, and we will be transformed.
For this perishable must put on imperishability, and this mortal put on immortality.
But when this perishable will have put on imperishability, and this mortal will have put on immortality, then will come to pass the saying that is written, Death was swallowed up in victory.
O death, where is thy sting? O Hades, where is thy victory?
The sting of death is sin, and the power of sin is the law.
But thanks is to God who gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my beloved brothers, become ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that your labor is not empty in the Lord.

Now concerning the collection for the sanctified, as I arranged for the congregations of Galatia, so also do ye.
Upon the first day of the week let each of you set something aside near himself, storing up whatever he may prosper, so that when I come no collections may be made then.
And when I arrive, whomever ye may approve by letters, I will send these men to bring your gift to Jerusalem.
And if it is fitting for me to go also, they will go with me.
But I will come to you when I pass through Macedonia, for I do pass through Macedonia.
And it may be that I will remain with you, or I will even spend winter, so that ye may set me on my way wherever I go.
For I do not want to see you now in passing, but I hope to remain some time with you, if the Lord allows.
But I will remain at Ephesus until Pentecost.
For a great and effective door has opened to me, and yet there are many who are hostile.
But if Timothy comes, see that he becomes without fear with you, for he works the work of the Lord, as I also.
Let not any man therefore disparage him, but send him forth in peace, so that he may come to me, for I expect him with the brothers.
And about Apollos the brother, I urged him much that he would come to you with the brothers, and it was not at all his will that he should come now, but he will come when he has opportunity.
Watch ye, stand firm in the faith, act like men, be strong.
Let all things of you be done in love.
Now I beseech you, brothers (ye know the house of Stephanas, that it is the first fruit of Achaia, and that they committed themselves to service for the sanctified),
that ye also be subject to such men, and to every man working together and laboring.
And I rejoice at the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus and Achaicus, because these men filled your lack.
For they refreshed my spirit and yours. Therefore acknowledge ye such men.
The congregations of Asia salute you. Aquila and Priscilla salute you much in the Lord, with the congregation associated with their house.
All the brothers salute you. Salute each other by a holy kiss.
The salutation of Paul by my hand.
If any man does not love the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed. Maranatha.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ is with you.
My love is with you all in Christ Jesus. Truly.

II Corinthians

Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Timothy the brother, to the congregation of God that is at Corinth, with all the sanctified who are in the whole of Achaia.
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of mercies and God of all encouragement,
who encourages us in all our affliction, in order for us to be able to encourage those in every affliction, through the encouragement of which we ourselves are encouraged by God.
Because, as the sufferings of the Christ abound to us, so also our encouragement abounds through the Christ.
But whether we are oppressed, it is for your encouragement and salvation, which works by endurance from the same sufferings that we also experience (and our hope for you is steadfast), or we are encouraged, it is for your encouragement and salvation,
knowing that, as ye are partakers of the sufferings, so also of the encouragement.
For we do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, about our affliction that happened to us in Asia, because we were extraordinarily weighed down, above strength, so as for us to despair even to be alive.
But we ourselves have had the sentence of death in ourselves, so that we should not be trusting in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead.
Who rescued us out of so great a death, and does rescue, in whom we have hoped that he will also still rescue.
And of you who help together by supplication for us (a gift for us from many persons, because of many), so that there may be gratitude about you.
For our pride is this (the testimony from our conscience), that we behave in the world in the simplicity and purity of God, not by fleshly wisdom but in the grace of God, and especially toward you.
For we write no other thing to you, but rather what ye read or also acknowledge. And I hope ye will also acknowledge until the end,
as also ye did acknowledge us in part, because we are your boast, just as ye also are ours in the day of the Lord Jesus.
And in this confidence I intended to come to you earlier, so that ye might have a second benefit,
and to pass through you into Macedonia, and to come again from Macedonia to you, and by you to be helped on the way toward Judea.
Therefore intending this, did I accordingly employ anything in lightness? Or what I decide, do I decide according to flesh, so that it would be with me the yes, yes and the no, no?
But God is faithful, because our word toward you became not, yes and no.
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ who was proclaimed among you by us (by me and Silvanus and Timothy) became not, yes and no, but in him has become, yes.
For as many as be promises of God, in him is the Yes, and in him the Truly, for glory to God through us.
Now he who establishes us with you in Christ, and who anointed us, is God.
He also is who put a seal on us, and who gave the pledge of the Spirit in our hearts.
But I call God for a witness upon my soul, that I did not yet come to Corinth, sparing you.
Not because we lord over your faith, but are co-workmen of your joy, for by faith ye stand.

But I determined this in myself, not to come again to you in sadness.
For if I make you sad, who then is he who makes me glad except he who is made sad by me?
And I wrote this same thing to you, so that when I came, I would not have sadness from whom I ought to rejoice, having been confident toward you all, because my joy is of all of you.
For out of much stress and dismay of heart, through many tears, I wrote to you, not that ye would be grieved, but that ye might know the love that I have so much more for you.
But if any man has caused sadness, he has not caused me sadness, but in part (that I may not bear down) you all.
Sufficient to such a man is this punishment by the many,
so that instead, for you rather to forgive and encourage, lest perhaps such a man would be swallowed up with too much sorrow.
Therefore I beseech you to affirm love for him.
For I also wrote for this, so that I might know the proof of you, whether ye are obedient in all things.
But to whom ye forgive anything, I too. For I also, whom I have forgiven (if anything), I have forgiven because of you in the presence of Christ,
so that we may not be exploited by Satan. For we are not ignorant of his methods.
Now having come to Troas for the good news of the Christ, and a door having been opened to me in the Lord,
I had no rest in my spirit, my not finding Titus my brother. But having departed from them, I went forth into Macedonia.
And thanks is to God who always causes us to triumph in the Christ, and who makes manifest the aroma of the knowledge of him in every place, through us.
to the one an odor of death for death, and to the other an aroma of life for life. And who is adequate for these things?
For we are not as other men, huckstering the word of God, but as from purity. But we speak in Christ as from God in the sight of God.

Are we beginning again to commend ourselves? Unless we need, as some men, commendatory letters to you or commendatory from you?
Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read by all men,
being seen that ye are a letter of Christ, administered by us, written not in ink, but in the Spirit of the living God, not in stony tablets, but in fleshly tablets, in hearts.
And we have such confidence toward God through Christ,
not that we are sufficient of ourselves to reckon anything as from ourselves, but our sufficiency is from God,
who also made us qualified helpers of a new covenant, not of a document, but of a Spirit, for the document kills but the Spirit makes alive.
But if the administration of death in writings engraved on stones occurred in glory, so that the sons of Israel could not gaze upon the face of Moses because of the fading glory of his countenance,
how will the administration of the Spirit not be more in glory?
For if the administration of condemnation has glory, the administration of righteousness excels much more in glory.
For also that which has been glorified, has not been glorified in this regard, because of the glory that transcends.
For if that which is abolished was through glory, much more that which remains is in glory.
Having therefore such a hope we use great boldness,
and are not as Moses. He put a veil over his face in order for the sons of Israel not to gaze on the end of the fading.
But their minds were hardened, for to this day the same veil remains at the reading of the old testament, not being uncovered, which thing is abolished in Christ.
But to this day when Moses is read, a veil lies upon their heart.
But whenever it turns to the Lord, the veil is removed.
Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty.
But we all, with unveiled face seeing by reflection the glory of the Lord, are transformed into the same likeness from glory to glory, just as from the Spirit of the Lord.

Because of this (having this ministry), in as much as we received mercy, we do not become discouraged.
But we have renounced the covert things of shame, not walking in craftiness, nor misrepresenting the word of God, but by the disclosure of the truth, commending ourselves to every conscience of men before God.
But even if our good news is concealed, it is concealed in those who are perishing,
in whom the god of this age has blinded the minds of the unbelieving, in order for the light of the good news of the glory of the Christ (who is a likeness of God) not to shine forth to them.
For we preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus as Lord, and ourselves are your bondmen through Jesus.
Because it is God who said, Out of darkness light is to shine, who shone in our hearts for an enlightenment of the knowledge of the glory of God in the presence of Jesus Christ.
But we have this treasure in earthen vessels, so that the excellence of the power may be of God and not from us,
restricted in everything, yet not confined, perplexed but not despairing,
persecuted but not forsaken, cast down but not destroyed.
Always carrying around in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, so that also the life of Jesus may be made visible in our body.
For we who live are always given over to death for Jesus' sake, so that also the life of Jesus may be made visible in our mortal flesh.
So death indeed works in us, but life in you.
And having the same spirit of faith, according to that which is written, I believed, therefore I spoke, we also believe, and therefore we speak,
knowing that he who raised up the Lord Jesus will also raise us up through Jesus, and will present us with you.
For all things are for your sakes, so that the grace, which has multiplied because of the thankfulness of the many, may abound for the glory of God.
Therefore we are not discouraged, but even if the outer man of us is perishing, yet the inner man is renewed day by day.
For our slight momentary affliction works for us an eternal weight of glory from extraordinariness to extraordinariness,
while we look not at things seen, but at things not seen. For things seen are temporal, but things not seen are eternal.

For we know that if the earthly house of our tent were destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made by hands, eternal in the heavens.
For also in this we groan, longing to clothe ourselves with our habitation from heaven,
if indeed also having put it on we will not be found naked.
For also those who are in the tent groan, being burdened, not in that we want to undress, but to clothe ourselves, so that the mortal may be swallowed up by the life.
Now he who wrought us for this same thing is God, who also gave us the pledge of the Spirit.
Therefore always being confident, and knowing that while at home in the body we are absent from the Lord,
for we walk by faith, not by sight.
And we are confident, and are pleased rather to be absent from the body and to be at home near the Lord.
Therefore also we aspire, whether at home or away from home, to be well-pleasing to him.
For we must all appear before the judgment-seat of the Christ, so that each man may receive back about the things that he did through the body, whether good or bad.
Having seen therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men. But we have been manifested to God, and I hope also to have been manifested in your consciences.
For we are not commending ourselves again to you, but giving you an opportunity of boasting about us, so that ye may have for those who boast in appearance and not in heart.
For whether we are beside ourselves to God, or we are of normal mind, it is for you.
For the love of Christ holds us together, having judge this, that if one died for all, then all died.
And he died for all so that those who live would no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for them, and was raised.
So that henceforth we know no man according to flesh, and even if we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him no longer.
So then if any man is in Christ, he is a new creation. The old things have passed away, behold, all things have become new.
And all things are from God who reconciled us to himself through Jesus Christ, and who gave to us the ministry of reconciliation.
How that God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself, not imputing to them their trespasses, and having committed to us the word of reconciliation.
We are therefore, ambassadors on behalf of Christ, as though God were calling through us. We plead on behalf of Christ, be ye reconciled to God.
For the man who knew no sin was made sin on our behalf, so that we might become the righteousness of God in him.

And working jointly, we urge you also not to receive the grace of God in vain
(for he says, At an acceptable time I heard thee, and in a day of salvation I helped thee. Behold, now is an acceptable time. Behold, now is a day of salvation),
giving not one cause of stumbling in anything, so that the ministry may not be criticized,
but in everything commending ourselves as helpers of God, in much perseverance, in afflictions, in necessities, in restrictions,
in stripes, in imprisonments, in tumults, in labors, in sleeplessness, in hungerings,
in purity, in knowledge, in longsuffering, in kindness, in the Holy Spirit, in non-hypocritical love,
in word of truth, in power of God, through the weapons of righteousness of the right hand and of the left,
through glory and disrepute, through slander and commendation; as deceitful, and yet true;
as unknown, and well known; as dying, and behold, we live; as punished, and not put to death;
as grieving, but always rejoicing; as poor, but making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things.
O Corinthians, our mouth has been opened to you, our heart has been enlarged.
Ye are not limited in us, but ye are limited in your bowels.
But I speak the same recompense as to children, be ye also enlarged.
Do not become unequally yoked with unbelievers, for what partnership has righteousness and lawlessness? And what fellowship has light with darkness?
And what agreement has Christ with Belial? Or what share have believers with non-believers?
And what mutual agreement has a temple of God with idols? For ye are a temple of the living God, just as God said, I will dwell in them, and will walk among them. And I will be their God, and they will be a people to me.
Therefore, Come ye out from among them, and be ye separated, says the Lord, And touch no unclean thing, and I will receive you
and will be for a Father to you, and ye will be for sons and daughters to me, says the Lord Almighty.

Having therefore these promises, beloved, let us cleanse ourselves from every filthiness of flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in fear of God.
Make room for us. We wronged no man, we corrupted no man, we exploited no man.
I speak not for condemnation, for I have said before that ye are in our hearts to die together and to live together.
Great is my boldness toward you, great is my pride for you. I have been filled with encouragement. I over-abound with joy in all our affliction.
battles outside, fears within.
Nevertheless God, who encourages the lowly, encouraged us by the arrival of Titus.
And not only by his presence, but also by the encouragement with which he was encouraged by you, reporting to us your earnest desire, your mourning, your zeal for me, so that I rejoiced the more.
Because even though I grieved you in the letter, I am not remorseful (even though I was remorseful), for I perceive that that letter grieved you, even though for an hour.
Now I rejoice, not that ye were grieved, but that ye were grieved for repentance. For ye were grieved toward God, so that ye might suffer loss from us in nothing.
For sorrow toward God works repentance for salvation without regret, but the sorrow of the world works death.
For behold this same thing-your grieving toward God. How much eagerness it worked in you, even a defense, even indignation, even fear, even longing, even zeal, even vengeance! In everything ye demonstrated yourselves to be pure in the matter.
And so then, although I wrote to you, it was not because of the man who did wrong, nor because of the man who was wronged, but in order to reveal to you your eagerness for us in the sight of God.
Because of this we have been encouraged. And from your encouragement, we rejoiced to a greater degree more at the joy of Titus, because his spirit has been refreshed by you all.
Because, if I have boasted anything to him about you, I am not ashamed, but as we spoke all things in truth to you, so also our boast to Titus became truth.
And his bowels are more abundant toward you, remembering the obedience of you all, how ye received him with fear and trembling.
I rejoice that I have confidence in you in everything.

And, brothers, we declare to you the grace of God that has been given in the congregations of Macedonia,
that in a great trial of affliction the abundance of their joy, even from the depth of their poverty, abounded for the wealth of their generosity,
so that according to their ability, I testify, and beyond their ability, willingly,
with much exhortation, begging of us the favor, even the fellowship of service for the sanctified.
And it was not as we expected, but first they gave themselves to the Lord and to us through the will of God,
for us to urge Titus that, as he earlier began this kindness, so he would even finish it for you also.
But as ye abound in everything, in faith, and word, and knowledge, and all diligence, and in your love to us, so that ye may also abound in this kindness.
I speak not from commandment, but because of the zeal of others, also examining the genuineness of your love.
For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that although he was rich he became poor for your sakes, so that by that man's poverty ye might become rich.
And in this I give judgment, for this is expedient for you who earlier began, from a year ago, not only the doing but also the intending.
And now also finish the doing, so that just as was the willingness of the intending, so also to finish from the having.
For if the willingness is present, it is acceptable to the extent if some man has, not to the extent he does not have.
For it is not so that ease is for others and stress for you, but out of parity your abundance at the present time is for the need of those men.
So that the abundance of those men may also happen for your need, so that there may become equity,
as it is written, he of much did not abound, and he of little did not lack.
But thanks to God who gives the same eagerness for you in the heart of Titus.
Because he indeed accepted the exhortation, but his own will being more zealous, he went forth to you.
And we sent along with him the brother whose praise in the good news is throughout all the congregations.
And not only so, but who was also chosen by the congregations, a traveling companion of us with this gift administered by us, for the glory of the same Lord and our willingness.
Arranging this lest any man may criticize us in this bounty administered by us,
providing things right, not only in the sight of the Lord, but also in the sight of men.
And we sent along with them our brother whom we often proved being diligent in many things, but is now much more diligent (with much confidence toward you)
whether on behalf of Titus my partner and co-workman for you, or our brothers, apostles of congregations, a glory of Christ.
Therefore show ye the proof of your love and our boast about you, for them in the face of the congregations.

For indeed it is superfluous for me to write to you about the service for the sanctified.
For I know your willingness, which I boast about you to the Macedonians, that Achaia was prepared from a year ago. And your zeal provoked the majority.
But I sent the brothers so that our boast about you would not be empty in this regard. So that, as I said, ye may be prepared,
if somehow Macedonians should come with me and find you unprepared, we (that we might not say, ye) would be embarrassed in this confidence of boast.
Therefore I thought it necessary to exhort the brothers that they would go ahead to you, and arrange in advance your gift that was earlier announced, for this to be ready this way as a gift and not as an exaction.
But this, he who sows sparingly will also reap sparingly, and he who sows in blessings will also reap in blessings.
Each man as he purposes in his heart, not from regret or from necessity, for God loves a cheerful giver.
And God is able to abound all grace for you, so that always in everything having all sufficiency, ye may abound for every good work,
as it is written, He has scattered abroad. He has given to the poor. His righteousness endures into the age.
And he who supplies seed to the man who sows, and bread for eating, may he supply and multiply your seed, and may he increase the fruits of your righteousness,
being enriched in everything for every generosity, which works gratitude to God through us.
Because the service of this ministry is not only supplying the needs of the sanctified, but also abounding through many thanksgivings to God
through the evidence of this service, glorifying God at the subjection of your confession toward the good news of the Christ, and at the generosity of the participation, for them and for all,
and by their supplication about you, yearning for you because of the transcending grace of God in you.
And thanks to God for his indescribable gift.

Now I Paul myself entreat you by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, who indeed am lowly in presence among you, but am bold toward you when absent.
But I pray not to be bold when present with the confidence by which I consider to be valiant toward some who consider us as walking according to flesh.
For though walking in flesh, we do not war according to flesh.
For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty in God for the demolition of strongholds,
casting down imaginations, and every high thing exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing every thought captive into the obedience of the Christ,
and having in readiness to avenge every disobedience, whenever your obedience is fulfilled.
Do ye look at things according to appearance. If any man has convinced himself to be of Christ, let him consider this again of himself, that, as he is of Christ, so also are we of Christ.
For even if I also should boast somewhat more abundantly about our authority (which the Lord gave us for building up and not for tearing you down), I will not be shamed,
so that I would not seem as if to terrify you by the letters.
Because, The letters, he says, are indeed weighty and powerful, but his bodily presence is weak, and his speech is disdained.
Let such a man think this, that such kind we are in word by letters when absent, we are also such kind when present in the work.
For we dare not classify or compare ourselves to some of those who commend themselves. But they, measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves to themselves, do not understand.
But we will not boast in things immeasurable, but according to the measure of the standard that God apportioned to us, of a measure to reach even as far as you.
For it is not as not reaching for you. We overextend ourselves. For we even reached as far as you in the good news of the Christ,
not boasting in things immeasurable, in other men's labors, but having hope of your faith growing in you to be enlarged according to our measure for abundance,
in order to preach the good news beyond you, not to boast in another measure, in things prepared.
But he who boasts should boast in the Lord.
For he who commends himself, that man is not approved, but whom the Lord commends.

O that ye tolerated a little of my foolishness, but tolerate me too.
For I am jealous for you with a jealousy of God. For I betrothed you to one husband, a pure virgin to present to the Christ.
But I fear lest somehow, as the serpent enticed Eve by his craftiness, so your thoughts might be corrupted from the simplicity in the Christ.
For indeed if a man who comes, preaches another Jesus whom we did not preach, or ye receive another spirit that ye did not receive, or another good news that ye did not accept, ye well tolerated it.
For I reckon to come short in nothing of those, superlative apostles.
But even if I am unskilled in speech, yet not in knowledge, but in everything made known in all things to you.
Or did I commit a sin lowering myself so that ye might be lifted up, because I preached to you the good news of God freely?
I robbed other congregations, having taken a wage in order for your service.
And being present with you, and when needy, I was a burden to no man. For the brothers who came from Macedonia, they supplied my need. And in everything I kept and I will keep myself non-burdensome to you.
The truth of Christ is in me that this pride in me will not be stopped in the regions of Achaia.
Why? Because I do not love you? God knows.
But what I do, I also will do, so that I may cut off the opportunity of those who desire an opportunity, that in what they boast, they might appear just as we also.
For such men are false apostles, deceitful workmen, disguising themselves into apostles of Christ.
And no marvel, for even Satan disguises himself into an agent of light.
Therefore, it is no great thing if his helpers also disguise themselves as helpers of righteousness, whose end will be according to their works.
I say again, let not any man think me to be foolish, but if otherwise-even if as foolish-accept me, so that I also may boast some a little.
What I speak, I speak not according to the Lord, but as in foolishness, in this confidence of the boast.
Since many boast according to the flesh, I too will boast.
For being wise, ye gladly tolerate the foolish.
For ye tolerate it if some man enslaves you, if some man devours you, if some man seizes you, if some man lifts himself up, if some man strikes you on the face.
I speak as from shame, that we were so weak. Yet in whatever any man may be bold in foolishness, I say I too am bold.
Are they Hebrews? I too. Are they Israelites? I too. Are they a seed of Abraham? I too.
in toils, more abundantly; in stripes, countless; in prisons, more frequently; in deaths often.
From the Jews five times I received forty save one.
Thrice I was beaten with rods, once I was stoned, thrice I was shipwrecked, I have done a night and a day in the depth,
in frequent journeys, in perils of flowing waters, in perils of bandits, in perils from my race, in perils from Gentiles, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils at sea, in perils among false brothers,
in toil and hardship, in frequent sleeplessness, in hunger and thirst, in frequent fasts, in cold and nakedness.
Besides the external things, crowding upon me daily is the care of all the congregations.
Who is weak, and I am not weak? Who is caused to stumble, and I am not made fiery?
If it is necessary to boast, I will boast of the things of my weakness.
The God and Father of the Lord Jesus Christ, he who is blessed into the ages, knows that I do not lie.
In Damascus the governor under Aretas the king guarded the city of the Damascenes wanting to apprehend me.
And I was lowered in a hamper through a window through the wall, and escaped his hands.

(Really, to me boasting is not helpful.) For I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord.
I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago (whether in body, I know not, or whether outside the body, I know not, God knows) such a man was caught up as far as the third heaven.
And I know such a man (whether in body, or whether outside the body, I know not, God knows)
that he was caught up into the paradise, and heard inexpressible sayings that are not permitted for a man to utter.
For such a man I will boast, but for myself I will not boast, except in my weaknesses.
For if I should want to boast, I will not be foolish, for I will speak the truth. But I refrain lest any man should reckon to me above what he sees of me or hears anything from me.
And so that I might not be over exalted by the extraordinariness of the revelations, there was given to me a thorn in the flesh, an agent of Satan so that he would buffet me, so that I would not be over exalted.
I besought the Lord thrice about this, that it might depart from me.
And he said to me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my power is made fully perfect in weakness. More gladly therefore I will boast in my weaknesses, so that the power of the Christ may reside in me.
Therefore I am pleased in weaknesses, in injuries, in necessities, in persecutions, in restrictions, for the sake of Christ. For when I am weak, then I am strong.
I have become foolish, boasting. Ye compelled me, for I ought to have been commended by you. For I came short in nothing of those, superlative apostles, even though I am nothing.
Indeed the signs of the apostle were performed among you in all perseverance, in signs and wonders and mighty works.
For what is there which ye were inferior to the other congregations? Except that I myself was not burdensome to you? Forgive me this wrong.
Behold, a third time I fare readily to come to you, and I will not be burdensome to you, for I seek not the things of you, but you. For the children ought not lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children.
And I most gladly will spend, and will be spent for your souls. Even though more earnestly loving you, the worse I am loved.
But let it be. I did not burden you. Nevertheless, being clever, I caught you with bait.
Any man of whom I have sent to you, did I exploit you through him?
I encouraged Titus, and I sent the brother with him. Did Titus exploit you in anything? Did we not walk in the same spirit, not in the same steps?
Again, do ye think that we are making defense to you? In the sight of God we speak in Christ. But all things, beloved, are for your edification.
For I fear lest somehow, having come, I may find you not such as I want, and I may be found by you such as ye do not want, lest somehow there be strifes, envyings, wraths, selfish ambitions, slanderings, whisperings, puffings up, turmoils,
lest having come again my God will make me low toward you, and I will bewail many of those who have sinned previously, and who did not repent from the trash and fornication and licentiousness that they committed.

This third time I am coming to you. In the mouth of two witnesses or three every saying will be confirmed.
I have told you before, and I say in advance, as present the second time, and now absent, I write to those who have previously sinned, and to all the others, that if I come to it again, I will not spare,
since ye seek proof of the Christ speaking in me, who is not weak toward you, but is mighty in you.
For even if he was crucified from weakness, yet he lives from the power of God. For we in him are also weak, but we will live with him from the power of God toward you.
Examine yourselves whether ye are in the faith. Test yourselves. Or know ye not yourselves, that Jesus Christ is in you? Unless ye are test-failing something.
But I hope that ye will know that we are not test-failing.
Now I pray to God, to do you nothing harmful, not that we would appear test-passing, but that ye would do right, even like we might be test-failing.
For we do not have any power against the truth, but for the truth.
For we are glad when we are weak and ye are strong. And this also we pray for, your full qualification.
Because of this I write these things while absent, so that I may not act harshly when present, according to the authority that the Lord gave me for building up and not for tearing down.
Finally brothers, farewell. Be thoroughly prepared, be encouraged, think the same way, live in peace, and the God of love and peace will be with you.
Salute each other by a holy kiss.
All the sanctified salute you.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, is with all of you. Truly.

Galatians

Paul, an apostle (not from men, nor through man, but through Jesus Christ and God the Father who raised him from the dead),
Grace to you and peace from God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ
who gave himself for our sins, so that he might rescue us, according to the will of our God and Father, out of the evil age that has come,
to whom is the glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him who called you in the grace of Christ to another good news,
which is not another, except there are some who confuse you, and who want to pervert the good news of the Christ.
But even if we, or an agent from heaven, should preach a good news to you contrary to what we preached to you, let him be accursed.
As we have said before, I now also say again, if any man preaches a good news to you contrary to what ye received, let him be accursed.
For do I now trust men or God? Or do I seek to please men? For if I were still pleasing men I would not be a bondman of Christ.
For I make known to you, brothers, the good news that was preached by me, that it is not according to man.
For I neither received it from man, nor was I taught it, but it was through revelation of Jesus Christ.
For ye heard of my former behavior in Judaism, that I persecuted the church of God to extraordinariness, and ravaged it.
And I advanced in Judaism beyond many contemporaries among my race, being a more extreme zealot of my paternal traditions.
But when it pleased God who separated me from my mother's belly, and called me through his grace,
to reveal his Son in me, so that I might preach him among the Gentiles, I did not straightaway confer with flesh and blood,
nor did I go up to Jerusalem to the apostles before me, but I went into Arabia and returned again to Damascus.
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem to visit with Peter, and I remained with him fifteen days.
But I did not see another of the apostles except James the Lord's brother.
Now what I write to you, behold before God, I do not lie.
Later I came into the regions of Syria and Cilicia.
And I was unknown by face to the congregations of Judea in Christ,
but they were only hearing that the man who once persecuted us now preaches the good news, the faith that he once ravaged.
And they glorified God in me.

Then after fourteen years I went up again to Jerusalem with Barnabas, having taken along Titus also.
And I went up according to revelation, and I declared to them the good news that I preach among the Gentiles, but privately to those who were of repute, lest somehow I might be running or ran in vain.
But not even Titus with me, being a Greek, was compelled to be circumcised.
But that issue was because of those false brothers smuggled in, who sneaked in to spy out our liberty that we have in Christ Jesus, so that they might enslave us,
to whom we yielded in subjection not even for an hour, so that the truth of the good news might continue with you.
But from those who were reputed to be something (what kind they were formerly, it makes no difference to me, God does not accept a personage of man), for those who were of repute added nothing to me,
but to the contrary, when they saw that I was entrusted with the good news for men of uncircumcision, as Peter for men of circumcision
(for he who was working in Peter for the apostleship for men of circumcision was also working in me for the Gentiles),
and James and Cephas and John, those who were reputed to be pillars, when they understood the grace that was given to me, they gave to me and Barnabas the right hands of fellowship. So that we were for the Gentiles, and they for men of circumcision,
only that we should remember the poor, which this same thing I also was eager to do.
But when Peter came to Antioch I opposed him to the face, because he was blameworthy.
For before certain men came from James he ate together with the Gentiles, but when they came, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing men of circumcision.
And the other Jews also joined in hypocrisy with him, so that even Barnabas went along with their hypocrisy.
But when I saw that they did not walk uprightly toward the truth of the good news, I said to Peter before all, If thou being a Jew, live as a Gentile and not as a Jew, why do thou compel the Gentiles to live as Jews?
We are Jews by nature and not sinful men of the Gentiles,
knowing that a man is not made righteous from works of law, instead through faith of Jesus Christ. And we believed in Christ Jesus, so that we might be made righteous from faith of Christ, and not from works of law, because no flesh will be made righteous from works of law.
But if, while seeking to be made righteous in Christ, we ourselves were also found sinful, then is Christ an aide of sin? May it not happen!
For if I build again these things that I tore down, I demonstrate myself a transgressor.
For I, through law, died to law, so that I might live to God.
I have been crucified with Christ, and I no longer live, but Christ lives in me. And what I now live in flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God who loved me and gave himself up for me.
I do not disregard the grace of God, for if righteousness is through law, then Christ died in vain.

O foolish Galatians, who bewitched you not to obey the truth, before whose eyes Jesus Christ was earlier described among you, crucified?
I only want to learn this from you. Did ye receive the Spirit from works of law, or from a listening ear of faith?
Are ye so foolish, having begun in Spirit, are ye now made perfect by flesh?
Did ye suffer so many things in vain? If it is indeed in vain.
He therefore who supplies the Spirit to you and who works miracles among you, is it from works of law or from a listening ear of faith?
Just as Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him for righteousness.
Ye know therefore that those from faith, these are sons of Abraham.
In thee all the nations will be blessed.
So then those from faith are blessed with the faithful Abraham.
For as many as are from works of law are under a curse, for it is written, Cursed is every man who does not continue in all things written in the book of the law, to do them.
But that no man is made righteous by law before God, is evident, because, The righteous man will live from faith.
And the law is not from faith, but the man who does them will live in them.
Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us. For it is written, Cursed is every man who hangs on a tree.
So that the blessing of Abraham might occur for the Gentiles in Christ Jesus, so that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through the faith.
Brothers (I speak according to a man), in the same way of a man, no man annuls or adds to a contract that has been ratified.
Now the promises were spoken to Abraham and to his seed. He does not say, And to the seeds, as of many, but as of one, And to thy seed, who is Christ.
And I say this, a covenant previously confirmed by God in Christ, the law, which happened four hundred and thirty years after, does not annul in order to make the promise useless.
For if the inheritance is from law, it is no longer from promise. But God has given it to Abraham through promise.
Why then the law? It was added on account of transgressions, until the seed would come to whom it was promised, which was arranged through agents in the hand of a mediator.
Now a mediator is not of one, but God is one.
Is the law therefore against the promises of God? May it not happen! For if a law was given that could make alive, truly righteousness would be from law.
But scripture confined all things under sin, so that the promise from faith in Jesus Christ might be given to those who believe.
But before faith came we were kept in custody under law, having been confined for faith that was going to be revealed.
So that the law became our schoolmaster for Christ, so that we might be made righteous from faith.
But faith having come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster.
For ye are all sons of God through faith in Christ Jesus.
For as many as were immersed into Christ have put on Christ.
There is no Jew nor Greek, there is no bondman nor freeman, there is no male and female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
And if ye are Christ's, then ye are Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise.

But I say the heir, for as long a time as he is a child, differs nothing from a bondman though he is lord of all.
Instead he is under stewards and managers until the time appointed from the father.
And so when we were children, we were in bondage under the rudiments of the world.
But when the fullness of the time came, God sent forth his Son, born from a woman, born under law,
so that he might redeem those under law, so that we might receive the sonship.
And because ye are sons, God sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
So that thou are no longer a bondman but a son, and if a son, then an heir through Christ.
But of course not knowing God then, ye were in bondage to those in nature who are not gods,
but now knowing God, but rather being known by God, how is it ye turn again to the weak and destitute elements to which ye desire again to be in bondage anew?
Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years.
I am afraid of you, lest somehow I have labored toward you in vain.
I beseech you, brothers, become like me, because I also am like ye. Ye wronged me in nothing.
But ye know that through a weakness of the flesh I preached the good news to you the first time.
And ye did not disdain, nor did ye reject my trial in my flesh, but ye received me as an agent of God, as Christ Jesus.
Where then is your satisfaction? For I testify to you, that if possible, having plucked your eyes out, ye would have given them to me.
So then have I become your enemy telling you the truth?
They are zealous for you but not honorably. They want to exclude you, so that ye may be zealous for them.
But to be zealous of is always good in a good thing, and not only when I am present with you.
My little children, of whom I suffer birth pains again until Christ is formed in you.
But I was wishing to be present with you now and to change my tone, because I am perplexed at you.
Tell me those desiring to be under law, do ye not hear the law?
For it is written that Abraham had two sons, one from the servant girl, and one from the freewoman.
But in fact, the man from the servant girl was born according to flesh, but the man from the freewoman through promise.
Which things are allegorized, for these are two covenants, indeed one from mount Sinai giving birth for bondage, which is Hagar.
For Hagar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and it corresponds to the present Jerusalem, and is in bondage with her children.
But the Jerusalem above is free, which is mother of us all.
For it is written, Rejoice, thou barren woman not giving birth. Burst forth and shout, thou not suffering birth pains, because many more are the children of the desolate than of her who has the husband.
Now we, brothers, who correspond to Isaac, are children of promise.
But just as then, the man who was born according to flesh persecuted the man according to Spirit, so also now.
Nevertheless, what does the scripture say? Send away the servant girl and her son, for the son of the servant girl will, no, not inherit with the son of the freewoman.
So then, brothers, we are not children of a servant girl, but of the freewoman.

Stand firm therefore in the liberty in which Christ freed us, and be not entangled again in a yoke of bondage.
Behold, I Paul say to you, that if ye are circumcised, Christ will benefit you nothing.
And I solemnly declare again to every man who is circumcised, that he is obligated to do the whole law.
Ye were discharged from the Christ, ye who are made righteous by law. Ye have fallen from grace.
For we through Spirit, from faith, wait for a hope of righteousness.
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails anything nor uncircumcision, but faith working through love.
Ye were running well. Who hindered you, not to obey the truth?
This persuasion is not from him who calls you.
A little leaven leavens the whole lump.
I have confidence toward you in the Lord, that ye will think no other thing. But the man who troubles you will bear the verdict, whoever he may be.
But I, brothers, if I still preach circumcision, why am I still persecuted? Then the stumbling-block of the cross has been abolished.
O that those who trouble you would even cut it all off.
For ye, brothers, were called to liberty, only not liberty for an opportunity to the flesh, but be servants to each other through love.
Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself.
But if ye bite and devour each other, watch out that ye be not consumed by each other.
But I say, walk in Spirit and ye will, no, not fulfill a lust of flesh.
For the flesh desires against the Spirit, and the Spirit is against the flesh. For these are hostile to each other, so that whatever these things are ye may want, ye may not do.
But if ye are led by Spirit ye are not under law.
Now the works of the flesh are apparent, which are, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, licentiousness,
idolatry, sorcery, hatreds, strifes, jealousies, wraths, selfish ambitions, dissensions, factions,
envyings, murders, intoxications, revelings, and things like these, of which I forewarn you, as I also did forewarn, that those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.
But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness,
meekness, self-control. Against such things there is no law.
And those of the Christ have crucified the flesh with its passions and the lusts.
If we live in Spirit, we should also march in Spirit.
Let us not become conceited, provoking each other, envying each other.

And brothers, if a man is overtaken in some transgression, ye the spiritual, restore such in a spirit of meekness, looking to thyself lest thou also be tempted.
Bear the burdens of each other, and so fulfill the law of the Christ.
For if some man presumes to be something when he is nothing, he deceives himself.
But let each man examine his own work, and then he will have the boast in himself alone and not in the other man.
For each man will bear his own burden.
But let him who is taught in the word share in all good things with him who teaches.
Be not misled, God is not mocked, for whatever a man sows this he will also reap.
Because he who sows to his own flesh will from the flesh reap corruption, but he who sows to the Spirit will from the Spirit reap eternal life.
And let us not be weary doing good, for in our own time we will reap, not desponding.
So then as we have time, let us work what is good toward all men, and especially toward those belonging to a household of the faith.
See in how large letters I wrote to you with my hand.
As many as desire to make a good impression in flesh, these compel you to be circumcised, only so that they may not be persecuted for the cross of the Christ.
For not even those who have been circumcised themselves keep law, but they want you to be circumcised, so that they may boast in thy flesh.
But may it not be from me to boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.
For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails anything nor uncircumcision, but a new creation.
And as many as will march by this standard, peace upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God.
Finally, let no man cause troubles for me, for I bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with your spirit, brothers. Truly.

Ephesians

Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenly things in Christ.
Just as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, for us to be holy and unblemished before him in love.
Who predestined us for sonship through Jesus Christ for himself, according to the desire of his will,
for appreciation of the glory of his grace, by which he blessed us in him who is beloved.
In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of transgressions, according to the wealth of his grace,
which he abounded for us in all wisdom and intelligence.
Having made known to us the mystery of his will according to his desire, which he purposed within himself
for an administration of the fullness of the times. To gather together all things in the Christ, things in the heavens and things upon the earth,
in him in whom also we obtained an inheritance. Having been predestined according to the purpose of him who works all things according to the deliberation of his will,
for us to be for appreciation of his glory, men who have first hoped in the Christ.
In whom ye also, having heard the word of the truth, the good news of your salvation, in whom also having believed, ye were sealed with the Holy Spirit of the promise,
which is a pledge of our inheritance, for the redemption of the acquired possession, for appreciation of his glory.
Because of this I also, having heard of your faith in the Lord Jesus, and love for all the sanctified,
I cease not expressing thanks for you, making remembrance of you in my prayers.
So that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in knowledge of him,
having the eyes of your heart enlightened. For you to know what is the hope of his calling, and what is the wealth of the glory of his inheritance in the sanctified,
and what is the transcending greatness of his power toward us who believe, according to the working of the dominion of his might,
which he wrought in the Christ, having raised him from the dead and seated at his right hand in the heavenly things,
far above every principle office, and position of authority, and power, and lordship, and every name that is named, not only in this age, but also in that which is coming.
And he subordinated all things under his feet, and appointed him head over all things for the church,
which is his body, the fulfillment of him who fills all in all.

Even you, who were dead in trespasses and sins
in which ye once walked according to the era of this world, according to the ruler of the power of the air, the spirit that now works in the sons of disobedience.
Among whom we also all once behaved in the lusts of our flesh, doing the intentions of the flesh and of the thoughts, and were by nature children of wrath as also the others.
But God, being rich in mercy, through his great love that he loved us,
even us being dead in the transgressions, he made alive together with the Christ (ye are saved by grace),
and raised us up together, and seated us together in the heavenly things in Christ Jesus.
So that in the coming ages he might show the transcending wealth of his grace in kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.
For ye are saved by grace through faith, and this a gift of God, not from you,
not from works, so that not any man may boast.
For we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works, which God preordained that we should walk in them.
Remember therefore that once ye, the Gentiles in flesh, who are called uncircumcision by that which is called circumcision (in flesh, made by hands),
that ye were at that time independent of Christ, alienated from the citizenship of Israel, and alien of the covenants of the promise, having no hope and godless in the world.
But now in Christ Jesus ye, being formerly far off, became near in the blood of the Christ.
For he is our peace, who made both one, and broke down the dividing wall of partition,
having abolished in his flesh the enmity-the law of the commandments in ordinances-so that he might create in himself the two into one new man, making peace,
and might reconcile them both in one body to God through the cross, having slain the enmity by it.
And after coming he preached good news, peace to you, to those far off and to those near,
because through him we both have the access in one Spirit to the Father.
So then ye are no more alien and foreign, but fellow citizens of the sanctified, and belonging to the household of God.
Which was built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Christ Jesus himself being the chief corner,
in whom the whole building joined together grows into a holy temple in the Lord,
in whom ye also are built together in Spirit into a habitation of God.

For this reason I Paul, the prisoner of Christ Jesus on behalf of you Gentiles,
since indeed ye heard of the administration of the grace of God, which was given to me for you,
that according to revelation he made known to me the mystery, as I wrote before in brief.
With which reading ye can recognize my understanding in the mystery of the Christ,
which in other generations was not made known to the sons of men, as it has now been revealed by Spirit to his holy apostles and prophets.
For Gentiles to be fellow-heirs, and of the same body, and fellow partakers of his promise in the Christ through the good news.
Of which I became a helper according to the gift of that grace of God, which was given to me according to the working of his power.
To me, a man less than the least of all the sanctified, this grace was given to preach good news among the Gentiles, the unsearchable wealth of Christ,
and to make all men see what is the administration of the mystery hidden from the ages in God who created all things through Jesus Christ.
So that now the manifold wisdom of God might be made known to the principal offices and the positions of authority in the heavenly things, through the church,
according to the purpose of the ages, which he made in Christ Jesus our Lord,
in whom we have boldness and access in confidence through his faith.
Therefore I ask that ye not become discouraged at my tribulations on your behalf, which is your glory.
For this reason I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
from whom every patriarchy in heavens and on earth is named.
So that he would grant you, according to the wealth of his glory, to be strengthened with power through his Spirit for the inner man,
for the Christ to dwell in your hearts through faith,
having been rooted and grounded in love, so that ye may be able to grasp with all the sanctified what is the breadth and length and depth and height,
and to become aware of the love of the Christ, which transcends knowledge, so that ye may be filled in all the fullness of God.
Now to him who is able to do above extraordinary-above all things that we ask or think-according to the power that works in us,
to him is the glory in the church in Christ Jesus for all generations of the age of the ages. Truly.

I therefore, the prisoner in the Lord, call on you to walk worthily of the calling in which ye were called,
with all humility and meekness, with longsuffering, forbearing each other in love.
Endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,
one body, and one Spirit. Just as also ye were called in one hope of your calling,
one Lord, one faith, one immersion,
one God and Father of all. He is over all, and through all, and in us all.
But the grace was given to each of us, according to the measure of the gift of the Christ.
Therefore he says, Having ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts to men.
And what is the ascended, except that he also first descended into the lower parts of the earth?
He who descended is also the same man who ascended high above all the heavens, so that he might fill all things.
And indeed he gave the apostles, and the prophets, and the evangelists, and the shepherds and teachers
for the perfecting of the sanctified, for the work of ministry, for edification of the body of the Christ.
Until we all attain to the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to a standard of stature of the fullness of the Christ.
So that we may no longer be childish, tossed about and carried about by every wind of doctrine by the trickery of men in craftiness with the methodology of error.
But being truthful in love, we may cause all things to grow for him who is the head-the Christ-
from whom the whole body, joined together and united together through every connection of the supply, according to the working of each one part within a standard, makes the growth of the body for the construction of itself by love.
This I say therefore, and solemnly declare in the Lord, for you to walk no longer as also the other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind,
darkened in their understanding, alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, because of the callousness of their heart.
Who, having become callous, gave themselves over to licentiousness for the work of all uncleanness in greed.
But ye did not so learn the Christ,
if indeed ye heard him, and were taught in him, as truth is in Jesus,
for you to put off the old man according to your former conduct, the man who is corrupt according to the desires of deceitfulness,
and to be renewed in the spirit of your mind,
and to put on the new man according to God, the man who was created in righteousness and piety of the truth.
Therefore having put off falsehood, let each man speak truth with his neighbor, because we are body-parts of each other.
Be ye angry, and sin not. Let not the sun go down upon your wrath,
neither give a place to the devil.
Let the man who steals steal no more, but rather let him labor, working with his hands the good, so that he may have to give to him who has need.
Let no corrupt speech go out of your mouth, rather if there is any good word for edification of a need, so that it may give grace to those who hear.
And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, in which ye are sealed for a day of redemption.
Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and reviling be taken away from you, with all evil.
And become good toward each other, compassionate, forgiving each other, even as also God in Christ forgave us.

Become ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children.
And walk in love, as also the Christ loved us, and delivered himself up for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God for a fragrant aroma.
But fornication, and all uncleanness, or greed, shall not even be named among you as befits the sanctified,
also indecency, and foolish talking or jesting, things not befitting, but thankfulness instead.
For ye are men who know this, that no fornicator, or unclean man, or covetous man, who is an idolater, has any inheritance in the kingdom of the Christ and God.
Let no man deceive you by empty words, for because of these things the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience.
Do not become ye therefore partakers with them.
For ye were once darkness, but now light in the Lord. Walk as children of light
(for the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness and righteousness and truth),
proving what is acceptable to the Lord.
And do not associate with the unfruitful works of darkness, but instead even rebuke them.
For it is disgusting even to speak of the things happening by them secretly.
But all things exposed are revealed by the light, for everything that is seen is light.
Therefore he says, Awake, thou who sleep. And arise from the dead, and the Christ will shine upon thee.
Therefore watch carefully how ye walk, not as unwise but as wise,
redeeming the time, because the days are evil.
Because of this do not become foolish, but understanding what is the will of the Lord.
And do not become intoxicated with wine, during which is debauchery, but be filled in Spirit,
speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and striking strings in your heart to the Lord,
expressing thanks always for all things in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to the God and Father,
submitting yourselves to each other in the fear of Christ.
Wives, submit to your own husbands as to the Lord.
Because a husband is head of the wife, as also Christ is head of the church, and himself the savior of the body.
But as the church is subject to the Christ, so also the wives to their own husbands in everything.
Husbands, love your own wives even as Christ also loved the church, and delivered himself up for it,
so that he might sanctify it, having cleansed it with the washing of water by the word,
so that he might present it to himself, the glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and unblemished.
So ought the husbands to love their own wives as their own bodies. He who loves his own wife loves himself.
For no man ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes and cherishes it, just as also Christ the church,
because we are parts of his body, of his flesh and of his bones.
Separate from this a man will leave his father and mother behind, and will be bonded with his wife, and the two will be in one flesh.
This mystery is great, but I speak for Christ and for the church.
Nevertheless ye also, each one in particular, shall so love his own wife as himself, and the wife that she fear her husband.

Children, obey your parents in the Lord, for this is right.
Honor thy father and mother, which is the first commandment with promise,
so that it may become well with thee, and thou will be long lasting on the earth.
And ye fathers, do not exasperate your children, but rear them in the training and admonition of the Lord.
Bondmen, be obedient to the masters according to flesh, with fear and trembling, in simplicity of your heart as to the Christ.
Not according to eye-service, as men-pleasers, but as bondmen of Christ, doing the will of God from the soul,
bond-serving with goodwill, as to the Lord and not to men.
Knowing that whatever good thing each may do, he will receive this from the Lord, whether bondman or freeman.
And ye masters, do the same things to them, easing up the threats, knowing also that the master of you yourselves is in the heavens, and there is no partiality from him.
Finally my brothers, be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might.
Put on the full armor of God to enable you to stand against the wiles of the devil.
Because our wrestling is not against flesh and blood, but against the principal offices, against the positions of authority, against the world-rulers of the darkness of this age, against the spiritual things of wickedness in the heavenly things.
Because of this take ye up the full armor of God, so that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand.
Stand ye therefore having girded your loins with truth, and having put on the breastplate of righteousness,
and having shod your feet in preparation of the good news of peace.
Above all having taken up the shield of faith, by which ye will be able to quench all the fiery darts of evil.
And take the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
praying through every prayer and entreaty at every time in spirit, and being alert in this same thing in all perseverance and entreaty for all the sanctified,
and for me, so that utterance may be given to me in boldness in opening my mouth to make known the mystery of the good news,
for which I am an ambassador in bondage, so that in it I may speak boldly, as I ought to speak.
But that ye also may know the things concerning me, what I do, Tychicus, the beloved brother and faithful helper in the Lord, will make known all things to you.
Whom I sent to you for this same thing, so that ye might know the things about us, and that he might encourage your hearts.
Peace to the brothers, and love with faith from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
The grace is with all those who love our Lord Jesus Christ with incorruptibility. Truly.

Philippians

Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God upon every memory of you,
always in my every entreaty for all of you, making the entreaty with joy
for your participation in the good news from the first day until now.
Being confident of this same thing, that he who began a good work in you will complete it until the day of Christ Jesus.
Just as it is right for me to think this about all of you, because I have you in my heart, both in my bonds and in the defense and confirmation of the good news, you all being partners with me of the grace.
For God is my witness, how I long for you all in bowels of Jesus Christ.
And this I pray, that your love may abound still more and more in knowledge and all discernment
for you to examine the things that are significant. So that ye may be tested by sunlight and not stumbling toward the day of Christ,
having been filled with fruits of righteousness, through Jesus Christ, for glory and praise of God.
But I want you to know, brothers, that the things in respect to me have come more for the advancement of the good news,
in order for my bonds in Christ to become apparent in the whole Praetorium, and in all the others.
And more of the brothers in the Lord have been convinced by my bonds to be much more bold to speak the word fearlessly.
Actually some even preach the Christ because of envy and strife, and some also because of good-will.
Some indeed proclaim the Christ from selfish ambition, not sincerely, supposing to bring affliction to my bonds.
But some from love, knowing that I am set for the defense of the good news.
What then? Except in every way, whether in pretence or in truth, Christ is proclaimed, and in this I rejoice, but also I will rejoice.
For I know that this will turn out to me for salvation (through your entreaty, and the support of the Spirit of Jesus Christ)
according to my eager expectation and hope that I will be shamed in nothing. But with all boldness, now as always, Christ will also be magnified in my body, whether through life or through death.
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain.
But if to live in flesh, this is fruit of labor to me, then what I will choose I know not.
And I am constrained by the two, having the desire to depart and be with Christ, being far better.
But to remain in the flesh is more necessary because of you.
And having been convinced of this, I know that I will remain, and will continue with you all for your progress and joy in the faith.
So that your pride may abound in Christ Jesus in me because of my presence with you again.
Only be citizens worthy of the good news of the Christ, so that, whether having come and having seen you or being absent, I may hear things about you that ye stand firm in one spirit, with one soul striving together for the faith of the good news.
And not being frightened in anything by those who oppose, which is indeed a sign of destruction to them, but to you of salvation, and this from God.
Because to you it was granted on behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him,
having the same conflict such as ye saw in me, and now hear is in me.

If therefore any exhortation is in Christ, if any encouragement of love, if any fellowship of spirit, if any bowels and mercies,
fulfill my joy, that ye may think the same way, having the same love, being knit in soul, thinking in oneness,
in nothing according to selfish ambition or empty conceit, but in humility considering each other surpassing yourselves.
Look ye out each man not to things of yourselves, but each man also to the things of others.
Indeed have this way to think in you, that also was in Christ Jesus,
who, existing in the form of God, did not consider being equal to God something to seize and hold.
But he emptied himself, having taken a form of a bondman, having become in a likeness of men.
And having been found in a form like a man, he lowered himself, having become obedient until death, even of death from a cross.
Therefore God also highly exalted him and gave him the name above every name,
so that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of the heavenly, and the earthly, and the sub-earthly,
and that every tongue should acknowledge that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.
Therefore my beloved, just as ye have always obeyed, not only as in my presence, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling.
For it is God who works in you both to desire and to work for approval.
Do all things without grumblings and arguments,
so that ye may become blameless and pure children of God, blameless in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world.
Holding firm the word of life, for a boast by me in the day of Christ, that I did not run in vain nor labor in vain.
Yet even if I am poured out a libation upon the sacrifice and service of your faith, I am glad and rejoice with you all.
And in the same way, ye also be glad and rejoice with me.
But I hope in the Lord Jesus to send Timothy to you soon, so that I also may be cheerful when I know the things about you.
For I have no man like-minded who will genuinely care for the things about you.
For they all seek the things of themselves, not the things of Christ Jesus.
But ye know the proof of him, that, as a child to a father, he served with me for the good news.
Indeed therefore I hope to send this man immediately, whenever I may focus on the things concerning me.
And I trust in the Lord that I myself also will come soon.
But I considered it necessary to send to you Epaphroditus, my brother and co-workman and fellow soldier, and your apostle and servant of my need,
since he was longing for you all, and distressed because ye heard that he was sick.
For also he was sick, near death, but God was merciful to him, and not only him, but also me, so that I might not have sorrow upon sorrow.
Therefore I sent him more urgently, so that having seen him again, ye may rejoice, and I may be less sorrowful.
Receive him therefore in the Lord with all gladness, and hold such men esteemed.
Because for sake of the work of the Christ he came near the point of death, handing over his life so that he might fill up the deficiency of your service toward me.

Finally, my brothers, rejoice in the Lord. To write the same things to you is really not irksome to me, but safe for you.
Beware of the dogs, beware of the evil workmen, beware of the excision.
For we are the circumcision, men who worship in spirit to God, and who boast in Christ Jesus, and not being confident in flesh.
in circumcision the eighth day, of the race of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, a Hebrew of Hebrews; regarding law, a Pharisee;
regarding zeal, persecuting the church; regarding the righteousness in law, having become blameless.
But whatever was gain to me, these things I regarded loss because of the Christ.
But indeed therefore I even consider all things to be loss because of things surpassing, of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord, because of whom I suffered the loss of all things, and consider them to be rubbish, so that I may gain Christ,
and be found in him, not having my righteousness, that from law, but that through Christ's faith-the righteousness from God based on faith-
to know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the participation of his sufferings, being conformed to his death,
if somehow I might attain to the resurrection of the dead.
Not that I have already obtained or have already been fully perfected, but I press forward, if also I might seize upon that for which also I was seized by Christ Jesus.
Brothers, I reckon myself not to have seized, but one thing, indeed forgetting the things behind, and reaching forward to the things ahead,
I press forward toward the goal for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus.
As many therefore as are perfect should think this way. And if ye think anything differently, this also God will reveal to you.
However in what we have attained, to march by the same standard, to think the same way.
Brothers, become fellow-imitators of me, and watch those who so walk, just as ye have us for an example.
For many walk, who (I told you often, and now also say while weeping) are enemies of the cross of Christ,
whose end is destruction, whose god is the belly, and the glory in their shame, who mind earthly things.
For our citizenship exists in the heavens, from which also we await a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ,
who will transform the body of our lowliness, in order for it to become similar in form to the body of his glory, according to the working of his power even to subject all things to himself.

So then, my brothers, beloved and longed for, my joy and crown, so stand firm in the Lord this way beloved.
I exhort Euodias, and I exhort Syntyche, to think the same way in the Lord.
Yes, I ask thee also, genuine yokefellow, help them-the women who labored with me in the good news-with Clement also, and the rest of my co-workmen whose names are in the book of life.
Rejoice in the Lord always. Again I will say, rejoice.
Let your gentleness be known to all men. The Lord is near.
Be anxious about nothing, but in everything by prayer and supplication with thankfulness make your requests known to God.
And the peace of God that surpasses all understanding will guard your hearts and your minds in Christ Jesus.
Finally brothers, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honorable, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are commendable, if anything is a virtue, and if anything is praiseworthy, think on these things.
And what ye learned and received and heard and saw in me, these things do, and the God of peace will be with you.
But I rejoiced in the Lord greatly that now at last ye have revived thinking about me, in which also ye were thinking, but ye lacked opportunity.
Not that I speak regarding need, for I have learned in what things I am to be content.
I know both how to be abased and how to abound. In everything and in all things I have learned the secret both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to be lacking.
I can do all things in the Christ who strengthens me.
Nevertheless ye did well having shared with my affliction.
And ye Philippians also have seen that, in the beginning of the good news when I departed from Macedonia, not one congregation shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving except ye only,
because also in Thessalonica ye sent both once and again to my need.
Not that I seek the gift, but I seek the fruit that abounds to your account.
But I receive all things, and I abound. I have been filled, having received from Epaphroditus the things from you, an aroma of fragrance, an acceptable sacrifice well-pleasing to God.
And my God will fill your every need according to his wealth in glory in Christ Jesus.
Now to our God and Father is the glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Salute every sanctified man in Christ Jesus. The brothers with me salute you.
All the sanctified salute you, and especially those of the house of Caesar.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ is with you all. Truly.

Colossians

Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, and Timothy the brother,
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We give thanks to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, always praying about you,
having heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and the love toward all the sanctified,
because of the hope being reserved for you in the heavens, which ye heard before in the word of the truth of the good news
being present for you, just as also in all the world. And it is bearing fruit and increasing, just as also among you from the day that ye heard and recognized the grace of God in truth.
Just as also ye learned from Epaphras our beloved fellow bondman, who is a faithful helper of the Christ for you,
the man who also made clear to us your love in spirit.
Because of this we also, from the day that we heard, cease not praying for you and making request that ye may be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and spiritual understanding.
For you to walk worthily of the Lord for every desire to please, bearing fruit in every good work, and growing in the knowledge of God,
being strengthened in every ability, according to the dominion of his glory, for all perseverance and longsuffering with joy.
Giving thanks to the Father who made us qualified for the share of the portion of the sanctified in light.
Who rescued us out of the power of darkness, and transferred us into the kingdom of the Son of his love,
in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins,
who is an image of the invisible God, the firstborn of all creation.
Because in him all things were created, things in the heavens and things upon the earth, things visible and things invisible, whether thrones or lordships or principal offices or positions of authority, all things have been created through him, and for him.
And he is before all, and in him all things hold together.
And he is the head of the body, the church, who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, so that he might become preeminent in all things.
Because in him it was considered good for all the fullness to dwell,
and through him to reconcile all things to himself, having made peace through the blood of his cross, through him whether things upon the earth or things in the heavens.
And you, being formerly alienated and hostile in mind, in works, in things evil. But now he has reconciled
in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblemished and unblameable before him.
If ye truly continue in the faith, founded, and steadfast, and not moved away from the hope of the good news that ye heard, which was proclaimed in all creation under heaven, of which I Paul became a helper.
I now rejoice in sufferings for you, and make complete in my flesh things lacking of the afflictions of the Christ for his body, which is the church.
Of which I became a helper according to the administration of God, which was given to me for you to fulfill the word of God,
the mystery that was hidden from the ages and from the generations, but has now been made known to his sanctified.
To whom God wanted to make known what is the wealth of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
Whom we proclaim, admonishing every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, so that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.
For which also I labor, striving according to his working, which works in me with power.

For I want you to know how great a struggle I have about you, and those at Laodicea, and as many as have not seen my face in flesh.
So that their hearts may be encouraged, having been united together in love, and for all wealth of the full assurance of understanding, to knowledge of the mystery of the God and Father of the Christ.
In whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.
And I say this so that not any man may delude you with persuasive speech.
For even though I am absent in the flesh, yet I am with you in the spirit, rejoicing and seeing your orderliness, and the steadfastness of your faith for Christ.
As therefore ye received Christ Jesus the Lord, walk in him,
rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, just as ye were taught, abounding in it with thankfulness.
Take heed lest there will be any man taking you captive through the love of wisdom and empty deceit, according to the tradition of men, according to the rudiments of the world, and not according to Christ.
Because in him all the fullness of the divinity dwells bodily.
And ye are men who have been made full in him, who is the head of every principal office and position of authority.
In whom also ye were circumcised a circumcision not made with hands, in the removal of the body of the sins of the flesh by the circumcision of the Christ.
Having been buried with him in immersion, in which also ye were raised together through faith of the working of God, who raised him from the dead.
And you, being dead in transgressions and the uncircumcision of your flesh, you he made alive together with him, having forgiven us all the transgressions,
having erased the handwriting against us in the regulations that were hostile to us, and he has taken it up from the midst, having nailed it to the cross.
Having stripped the principal offices and the positions of authority, he exposed them openly, having triumphed over them by it.
Let not any man therefore judge you in eating, or in drinking, or in the matter of a festival or a new moon or sabbaths,
which are a shadow of the things coming, but the body is Christ's.
Let no man umpire against you insisting on self-mortification, and worship of the agents, intruding in things that he has not seen, vainly puffed up by the mind of his flesh,
and not holding to the head, from whom all the body, being supplied and held together through the connections and bonds, develops its growth from God.
If ye died with Christ from the rudiments of the world, why do ye submit to rules, as though living in the world?
Do not handle, nor taste, nor touch
(which are all things for consumption by use), according to the commandments and teachings of men?
Which having, are indeed a matter of wisdom in will-worship, and self-mortification, and austerity of the body-not in any value against indulgence of the flesh.

If therefore ye were raised with the Christ, seek the things above, where Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God.
Think on the things above, not the things on the earth.
For ye died, and your life has been hidden with the Christ in God.
When the Christ, our life, is made known, then ye also will be made known with him in glory.
fornication, uncleanness, passion, evil desire, and greed, which is idolatry.
Because of which the wrath of God comes upon the sons of disobedience,
in which ye also once walked when ye lived in them.
anger, wrath, wickedness, reviling, filthy speaking out of your mouth.
Do not lie to each other, having stripped off the old man with his practices,
and having put on the new man, being renewed in knowledge according to an image of him who created him,
where there is no Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman, but the all and in all, Christ.
Put on therefore, as chosen men of God, holy and beloved, bowels of compassion, kindness, humility, meekness, longsuffering,
forbearing each other, and forgiving yourselves, if any man has a complaint against any, just as also the Christ forgave you, so also ye,
and above all these things, love, which is the bond of perfection.
And let the peace of God umpire in your hearts, for which also ye were called in one body, and become thankful.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you abundantly in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing by grace in your hearts to God.
And all things, anything whatever ye may do in word or in deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, expressing thanks to the God and Father through him.
Wives, be ye submissive to your own husbands as is proper in the Lord.
Husbands, love the wives and do not be made bitter against them.
Children, obey the parents in all things, for this is well-pleasing in the Lord.
Fathers, do not provoke your children, so that they may not be discouraged.
Bondmen, obey in all things those masters according to flesh, not in eye-service as men-pleasers, but in simplicity of heart, fearing God.
And all things, anything whatever ye may do, work from soul as to the Lord and not to men,
knowing that from the Lord ye will receive the reward of the inheritance, for ye serve the Lord Christ.
And he who does wrong will be recompensed what he did wrong, and there is no partiality.

Masters, present to the bondmen what is right and equitable, knowing that ye also have a Master in heavens.
Continue in prayer, being vigilant in it with thankfulness.
Praying simultaneously about us also, so that God may open to us a door of the word, to speak the mystery of the Christ, because of which I have also been bound,
so that I may make it known as I ought to speak.
Walk in wisdom toward those outside, redeeming the time,
your speech always with grace, seasoned with salt, to know how it is fitting for you to answer each one.
Tychicus will make known to you all things about me, the beloved brother and faithful helper and fellow bondman in the Lord.
Whom I sent to you for this same thing, so that he may know the things about you, and may encourage your hearts,
with Onesimus, the faithful and beloved brother who is of you. They will make known to you all things here.
Aristarchus my fellow prisoner salutes you, and Mark, the cousin of Barnabas (about whom ye received orders, if he comes to you, welcome him),
and Jesus who is called Justus, these being the only fellow workmen from the circumcision for the kingdom of God, men who became a comfort to me.
Epaphras, the bondman of Christ from you, salutes you, always striving for you in prayers, so that ye may stand perfect and made full in all the will of God.
For I testify about him, that he has much zeal for you, and those in Laodicea, and those in Hierapolis.
Luke, the beloved physician, and Demas salute you.
Salute the brothers in Laodicea, and Nymphas, and the assembly associated with his house.
And when the letter has been read among you, cause that it be read also in the congregation of Laodiceans, and that ye also read the one from Laodicea.
And say to Archippus, Watch the ministry that thou received in the Lord so that thou may fulfill it.
The salutation of Paul by my hand. Remember my bonds. Grace is with you. Truly.

I Thessalonians

Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We thank God always about all of you, making recollection of you in our prayers,
remembering without ceasing your work of faith and labor of love and steadfastness of hope of our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and Father.
Knowing, beloved brothers, your selection by God,
because the good news from us happened to you not in word only, but also in power, and in the Holy Spirit, and in much assurance, as ye know what kind of men we became among you, because of you.
And ye became imitators of us and of the Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the Holy Spirit,
in order for you to become examples to all those who believe, in Macedonia and in Achaia.
For the word of the Lord has sounded forth from you, not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith toward God has gone forth, so that we have no need to say anything.
For they report about us what kind of entrance we had with you, and how ye turned to God from the idols to serve a living and true God,
and to await his Son from the heavens whom he raised from the dead-Jesus-who rescues us from the coming wrath.

For ye yourselves know, brothers, our entrance with you, that it has not become empty.
But having suffered before and been mistreated in Philippi, as ye know, we were bold in our God to speak to you the good news of God within much conflict.
For our exhortation is not from error, nor from uncleanness, nor in deception,
but as we have been approved by God to be entrusted with the good news, thus we speak, not as pleasing men, but God who proves our hearts.
For we came neither in word of flattery (at any time as ye know) nor a pretense of greed (God is witness)
nor seeking glory from men, neither from you nor from others. While able to bear down as apostles of Christ,
nevertheless we became gentle in the midst of you, as a nurse cherishes her own children.
Thus being desirous of you, we were pleased to impart to you, not only the good news of God, but also our own souls, because ye have become beloved to us.
For ye remember, brothers, our labor and the hardship. For, laboring night and day in order not to burden any of you, we preached to you the good news of God.
Ye are witnesses, and God, how piously and justly and blamelessly we became to you who believe,
just as ye know, as each one of you as a father of his own children, imploring you, and comforting,
and solemnly declaring for you to walk worthily of God, who calls you into his own kingdom and glory.
And because of this we thank God without ceasing, because, having received the word of God heard from us, ye received not the word of men, but as it truly is, the word of God, which also is at work in you who believe.
For ye, brothers, became imitators of the congregations of God, which are in Judea in Christ Jesus, because ye also suffered the same things by your own countrymen, just as also they by the Jews.
The men who both killed the Lord Jesus and their own prophets, and who persecuted us, and are not pleasing to God, and are contrary to all men.
Forbidding us to speak to the Gentiles so that they might be saved, in order to fill up their sins always. But wrath came upon them finally.
But we, brothers, who were orphaned from you for the time of an hour, in presence not in heart, hastened more earnestly to see your face, with much desire.
Therefore we wanted to come to you, indeed I, Paul, even once and again, and Satan hindered us.
For what is our hope or joy or crown of boast? Or is it not even ye, before our Lord Jesus at his coming?
For ye are our glory and joy.

Therefore, no longer covering over it, we preferred to be left behind in Athens alone.
And we sent Timothy, our brother, and a helper of God, and our fellow workman in the good news of the Christ, in order to establish you and to encourage you about your faith,
for no man to be disturbed by these afflictions. For ye yourselves know that we are set for this.
For also when we were with you we foretold you that we were going to be oppressed, just as it also happened, and ye know.
Because of this, I too, no longer covering over it, sent in order to know your faith, lest somehow he who tempts was tempting you, and our labor became in vain.
But now of Timothy, having come to us from you, and having proclaimed good news to us of your faith and love, and that ye always have a good recollection of us, longing to see us, just as we also you,
because of this, brothers, we were encouraged toward you in all our affliction and necessity through your faith.
Because now we live, if ye stand firm in the Lord.
For what thanks can we repay God about you, for all the joy in which we rejoiced because of you before our God,
praying night and day above extraordinary in order to see your face and to mend the deficiencies of your faith?
Now may our God and Father himself, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way to you.
And may the Lord make you increase and abound in love toward each other, and toward all men, just as also we toward you,
in order to establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his sanctified.

Finally therefore, brothers, we ask you, and summon in the Lord Jesus, that just as ye received from us how ye ought to walk and to please God, that ye may abound more.
For ye know what commandments we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
For this is the will of God, your sanctification, for you to abstain from fornication,
for each of you to know how to possess his own vessel in sanctification and reverence,
not in passion of lust, as also the Gentiles who have not known God,
not to transgress and to cheat his brother in the affair, because the Lord is vengeful about all these things, as also we forewarned you and solemnly testified.
For God did not call us to uncleanness, but in sanctification.
Therefore he who disregards, disregards not man, but God, who also gave his Holy Spirit to you.
But about brotherly love ye have no need to write to you, for ye yourselves are taught by God in order to love each other.
For ye are also doing it toward all the brothers in all Macedonia. But we exhort you, brothers, to abound more,
and to aspire to live quietly, and to do your own things, and to work with your own hands, just as we commanded you,
so that ye may walk properly toward those outside, and may have nothing lacking.
But we do not want you to be ignorant, brothers, about those who are asleep, so that ye may not grieve, as also the others who have no hope.
For if we believe that Jesus died and arose, so also those who became asleep through Jesus, God will bring with him.
For this we say to you in the word of the Lord, that we who are alive, who remain for the coming of the Lord, will no, not precede those who became asleep.
Because the Lord himself will descend from heaven with a shout, with a voice of the arch-agent, and with a trumpet of God. And the dead in Christ will rise first,
then we who are alive, who remain, will be caught up simultaneously with them in clouds to the Lord's gathering in the air. And so we will always be with the Lord.
Therefore encourage each other with these words.

But about the times and the seasons, brothers, ye have no need to be written to you.
For ye yourselves know accurately that the day of the Lord so comes as a thief in the night.
For when they say, Peace and safety, then sudden destruction approaches them, as the woman having birth pangs in her womb, and they will, no, not escape.
But ye, brothers, are not in darkness, so that the day would seize you as a thief.
Ye are all sons of light and sons of the day. We are not of the night nor of darkness.
So then let us not sleep, as also the others, but let us watch and be sober.
For those who sleep, sleep at night, and those who are intoxicated get drunk at night.
But we, being of the day, should be sober, putting on a breastplate of faith and love, and a helmet, the hope of salvation.
Because God appointed us not for wrath, but for an acquired possession of salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us.
So that, whether we are awake or sleep, we should live together with him.
Therefore encourage each other, and build ye up one by one, just as ye also are doing.
And we ask you, brothers, to acknowledge those who labor among you, and who lead you in the Lord, and who admonish you,
and to esteem them with exceptional love because of their work. Live peaceably among yourselves.
And we encourage you, brothers, admonish the unruly, strengthen the weak-spirited, help the infirmed, be patient toward all.
See that not any man repays evil for evil to any man, but always pursue the good, both for each other and for all.
Rejoice always.
Pray without ceasing.
In everything express thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus for you.
Do not quench the Spirit.
Do not disdain prophecies,
but examine all things. Hold firm the good.
Abstain from all appearance of evil.
And may the God of peace himself sanctify you thoroughly. And may your spirit and soul and body be preserved complete, blamelessly at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Faithful is he who calls you, who also will do it.
Brothers, pray about us.
Salute all the brothers by a holy kiss.
I adjure you by the Lord that the letter be read to all the holy brothers.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with you. Truly.

II Thessalonians

Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
We are indebted to thank God always about you, brothers, as it is fitting, because your faith is increasing greatly, and the love of each one of you all toward each other abounds.
So as for us ourselves to have pride in you in the congregations of God, for your perseverance and faith in all your persecutions and in the tribulations that ye endure,
being evidence of the righteous judgment of God, for you to be considered worthy of the kingdom of God, for which also ye suffer.
Since it is a righteous thing according to God to repay restriction to those who restrict you,
and relief with us, to you who are restricted, at the revealing of the Lord Jesus from heaven with his agents of power
in a fire of flame rendering vengeance to those who have not known God, and to those not obeying the good news of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Men who will suffer punishment, a penalty of eternal destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his might,
when he comes to be glorified in his sanctified, and to be marveled in that day by all those who believe (because our testimony among you was believed).
For which also we pray always about you, so that our God will make you worthy of the calling, and will fulfill every desire of goodness and work of faith with power.
So that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in you and ye in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ.

Now we ask you, brothers, on behalf of the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ and our gathering together to him,
for ye not to be quickly shaken from your mind, nor to be alarmed, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by a letter as by us, as that the day of the Christ has come.
Let not any man deceive you in any way, because if not, the defection may come first, and he may be revealed-the man of sin, the son of destruction,
who opposes and exalts himself against all that is called God or an object of worship, so as for him to sit in the temple of God, as God, displaying himself that he is God.
Do ye not remember that when I was yet with you I told you these things?
And now ye know that which restrains, for him to be revealed in his own time.
For the mystery of lawlessness is already working, only he who restrains it until now will develop from the midst.
And then the lawless will be revealed, whom the Lord will consume with the spirit of his mouth, and will neutralize at the appearance of his coming.
Whose coming is according to the working of Satan with all power and signs and marvels of deceit,
and in all deception of unrighteousness in those who are perishing, in return for which, they did not accept the love of the truth in order for them to be saved.
And because of this God will send them the force of a delusion, for them to believe a lie,
so that they might be condemned-all those who did not believe the truth, but who delighted in unrighteousness.
But we are indebted to express thanks to God always about you, brothers, beloved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning for salvation, in sanctification of spirit and belief of truth,
for which he called you, through our good news, for an acquired possession of glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.
So then, brothers, stand firm and hold to the traditions that ye were taught, whether by word or by letter from us.
And may our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and our God and Father who loved us and gave eternal encouragement and good hope through grace,
encourage your hearts and establish you in every good word and work.

Finally, brothers, pray about us, so that the word of the Lord may run and be glorified, just as also with you,
and that we may be delivered from aberrant and wicked men, for the faith is not of all men.
But the Lord is faithful, who will establish you and will keep you from evil.
And we are persuaded in the Lord toward you, that what we command you, ye both are doing and will do.
And may the Lord direct your hearts for the love of God, and for the steadfastness of the Christ.
Now we command you, brothers, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, for you to withdraw from every brother who walks disorderly and not according to the tradition, which they received from us.
For ye yourselves know how it is necessary to imitate us. Because we did not act disorderly among you,
nor did we eat bread gratis from any man, but in labor and toil, working night and day in order not to burden any of you.
Not because we have no right, but that we might give ourselves an example to you, in order to imitate us.
For even when we were with you we commanded you this, that if any man will not work, neither let him eat.
For we hear of some who walk among you disorderly, not working at all, but being busybodies.
Now to such men we command and exhort by our Lord Jesus Christ, that, working with quietness, they should eat their own bread.
But ye, brothers, do not become weary doing good.
And if any man does not obey our word by this letter, note that man, and do not associate with him, so that he may be ashamed.
And yet do not regard him as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother.
Now may the Lord of peace himself give you peace through everything in every way. The Lord is with all of you.
The salutation of Paul by my hand, which is a mark in every letter I write this way.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with all of you. Truly.

I Timothy

Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ according to a commandment of God our Savior, and the Lord Jesus Christ our hope,
Grace, mercy, peace, from God our Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
As I urged thee, while going to Macedonia, remain in Ephesus, so that thou might command certain men not to teach something different,
nor to heed myths and endless genealogies, which cause controversies rather than stewardship of God in faith.
But the end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart, and a good conscience, and non-hypocritical faith.
From which some having swerved have turned aside to empty talk,
desiring to be law teachers, understanding neither what they say, nor about what they confidently assert.
But we know that the law is good, if any man uses it lawfully,
knowing this, that law is not laid down for righteous men, but for the lawless and rebellious, for the irreverent and sinful, for the impious and profane, for father killers and mother killers, for man killers,
for fornicators, for homosexuals, for kidnappers, for liars, for perjurers, and if there is any other thing contrary to the sound doctrine
according to the good news of the glory of the blessed God, of which I was entrusted.
And I have gratitude to the Christ-Jesus our Lord-who empowered me, because he considered me faithful, having placed in service
the man who was formerly blasphemous, and a persecutor, and an aggressor. But I obtained mercy because I did it being ignorant in unbelief.
And the grace of our Lord was filled to overflowing with the faith and love in Christ Jesus.
Faithful is the saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinful men, of whom I am foremost.
But because of this I obtained mercy, so that in me, the foremost, Jesus Christ might show forth all longsuffering for an example of those who were going to believe in him for eternal life.
Now to the King of the ages, immortal, invisible, alone wise, to God is honor and glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
This command I set before thee, child Timothy, according to the prophecies leading the way for thee, so that by them thou might war the good warfare.
Holding faith and a good conscience, which some, having put away, made shipwreck about the faith,
of whom are Hymenaeus and Alexander, whom I delivered to Satan, so that they may be disciplined not to blaspheme.

I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings, be made for all men,
for kings and all those who are in prominence, so that we may live a quiet and peaceful life in all piety and propriety.
For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior,
who wants all men to be saved and to come to knowledge of truth.
For there is one God, and one mediator of God and men, the man Jesus Christ,
who gave himself a ransom for all, the testimony for their own times.
For which I was appointed a herald and an apostle (I speak the truth in Christ, I do not lie), a teacher of Gentiles in faith and truth.
I desire therefore the men to pray in every place, lifting up devout hands, apart from anger and argument.
And similarly, the women to adorn themselves in disciplined decorum, with reverence and sobriety, not with braided hair or gold or pearls or expensive apparel,
but (which is fitting for women professing godliness) through good works.
Let a woman learn in silence in all subjection.
But I do not allow a woman to teach, nor to have authority of a man, but to be in quietness.
For Adam was first formed, then Eve.
And Adam was not deceived, but the woman, having been deceived, became in transgression.
But she will be saved through childbearing, if they continue in faith and love and sanctification with sobriety.

Faithful is the saying, If any man aspires to supervision, he desires a good work.
The overseer therefore must be blameless, the husband of one wife, sober, serious minded, disciplined, loving strangers, able to teach,
no drunkard, not a fighter, not greedy of base gain, but gentle, noncontentious, no lover of money,
a man who rules his own house well, having children in subjection with all propriety
(but if any man knows not how to rule his own house, how will he take care of a congregation of God?),
not a new convert, lest having been puffed up he may fall into the condemnation of the devil.
And he must also have good testimony from those outside, lest he may fall into reproach and the snare of the devil.
Helpers likewise, be honorable, not double-tongued, not attending to much wine, not greedy of base gain,
holding the mystery of the faith in a pure conscience.
And let these also first be proven, then being blameless, let them serve.
The wives likewise, be honorable, not slanderous, sober, faithful in all things.
Let helpers be husbands of one wife, ruling children and their own houses well.
For those who serve well will acquire to themselves a good standing, and much boldness in the faith in Christ Jesus.
These things I write to thee, hoping to come to thee sooner,
but if I delay, that thou may know how it is necessary to live in a house of God, which is a congregation of the living God, the pillar and foundation of the truth.
And without controversy great is the mystery of piety. God was manifested in flesh, justified in spirit, seen by agents, proclaimed among nations, believed in the world, taken up in glory.

But the Spirit says expressly that in latter times some will depart from the faith, giving heed to deceitful spirits and doctrines of demons,
speaking lies in hypocrisy, their own conscience having been seared with a hot iron,
forbidding to marry, to abstain from foods, which God created for partaking with thankfulness by those who believe and know the truth.
Because every creation of God is good, and nothing rejected that is received with thankfulness,
for it is sanctified through the word of God and prayer.
Laying these things down to the brothers, thou will be a good helper of Jesus Christ, reared up in the words of the faith, and of the good doctrine that thou have followed.
But reject the profane and old wives' fables, and exercise thyself to piety.
For bodily exercise is profitable for a little, but piety is profitable for all things, having promise of the present life, and of that which is coming.
Faithful is the saying, and worthy of all acceptance.
For we both labor and are reproached for this, because we have hoped in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of the faithful.
These things command and teach.
Let no man disparage thy youth, but become an example of the faithful, in word, in conduct, in love, in spirit, in faith, in purity.
Until I come, give attention to reading, to exhortation, to teaching.
Do not neglect the gift in thee, which was given thee by prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the eldership.
Think on these things-exist within these things-so that thy progress may be visible among all.
Hold firm to thyself and to the doctrine. Continue in them, for in doing this thou will save both thyself and those who hear thee.

Do not rebuke an elder man, but entreat him as a father, younger men as brothers,
elder women as mothers, younger women as sisters, in all purity.
Support widows, the real widows.
But if any widow has children or grandchildren, let them first learn to be devoted to their own house, and to give back recompense to their parents, for this is acceptable in the sight of God.
But the real widow, and made alone, has hoped in God, and continues in entreaties and prayers night and day.
But she who is self-indulgent is dead while she lives.
And command these things, so that they may be blameless.
But if any man does not provide for his own, and especially those belonging his household, he has denied the faith, and is worse than an infidel.
Let no widow be enrolled under sixty years old, having become the wife of one man,
if she has reared children, if she has been hospitable to strangers, if she has washed the feet of the sanctified, if she has relieved those who are afflicted, if she has followed every good work.
But refuse younger widows, for when they are sexually aroused, they desire of the Christ to marry,
which has condemnation because they have disregarded the original pledge.
And also at the same time they learn to be idle, roving the houses, and not only idle, but also babbling and meddlesome, speaking things that they ought not.
I desire therefore the younger women to marry, to bear children, to manage house, to give not one occasion to him who opposes on account of slander.
For some have already turned aside after Satan.
If any believing man or believing woman has widows, let them relieve them, and let not the congregation be burdened, so that it may relieve the real widows.
Let the elders who rule well be regarded worthy of double compensation, especially those who labor in the word and in teaching.
For the scripture says thou shall not muzzle an ox that is threshing. And the workman is worthy of his wage.
Accept no accusation against an elder, except at two or three witnesses.
Those who sin, rebuke in the sight of all, so that the others may also have fear.
I solemnly testify before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the chosen agents, that thou keep these things without prejudice, doing nothing from partiality.
Lay hands hastily on no man, nor contribute to other sins. Keep thyself pure.
No longer drink water, but use a little wine because of thy stomach and thy frequent weaknesses.
The sins of some men are evident, leading to judgment, but also for some they follow after.
Likewise also good works are evident, and those faring otherwise cannot be hid.

Let bondmen, as many as are under a yoke, regard their own masters worthy of all respect, so that the name of God and the doctrine may not be blasphemed.
And those who have believing masters, let them not disparage them because they are brothers, instead let them serve more because they are believers and beloved-those who are recipients of the benefit. Teach and exhort these things.
If any man teaches something different, and does not associate with wholesome words, those of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to the doctrine according to piety,
he is puffed up, understanding nothing, but doting about disputes and word controversies, from which develop envy, strife, revilings, evil surmisings,
constant frictions of men corrupted in mind, and destitute of the truth, supposing piety to be a means of gain. Withdraw from such.
But piety with contentment is great gain,
for we brought nothing into the world. It is clear that neither can we carry anything out,
but having food and covering we will be content with these.
But those who want to be rich fall into a temptation and a snare and many foolish and harmful lusts, which sink men in destruction and ruin.
For the love of money is a root of all the evils, of which some aspiring have wandered from the faith, and have pierced themselves through with many sorrows.
But thou, O man of God, flee these things, and pursue righteousness, piety, faith, love, patience, meekness.
Fight the good fight of the faith. Take hold of the eternal life for which thou are called, and confessed the good confession in the sight of many witnesses.
I command thee in the sight of God, who makes all live, and of Christ Jesus, who testified to Pontius Pilate the good confession,
that thou keep the commandment, without spot, blameless, until the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ,
which he will show in his own times, the blessed and only Potentate, the King of those who are kings, and Lord of those who are lords,
who alone has immortality, dwelling in irreproachable light, whom no man has seen, nor can see, to whom is honor and eternal dominion. Truly.
Command the rich in the present age not to be arrogant, nor hope in the uncertainty of wealth, but in the living God, who supplies us all things abundantly for enjoyment,
to do good, to be rich in good works, to be generous, willing to share,
storing up for themselves a good foundation for that which is coming, so that they may take hold of the eternal life.
O Timothy, keep the entrustment, avoiding the profane babblings and objections of the falsely-called knowledge,
which some men professing have missed the mark concerning the faith. Grace is with thee. Truly.

II Timothy

Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ through the will of God, according to the promise of the life in Christ Jesus,
Grace, mercy, peace, from God the Father and Christ Jesus our Lord.
I have gratitude to God whom I serve from the forefathers in a pure conscience, as I have unceasing remembrance about thee in my supplications, night and day
longing to see thee, having remembered thy tears, so that I may be filled with joy,
taking memory of the non-hypocritical faith in thee, which first dwelt in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded that is in thee also.
Because of which reason I remind thee to rekindle the gift of God that is in thee through the laying on of my hands.
For God did not give us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of soberness.
Be not ashamed therefore of the testimony of our Lord nor of me his prisoner, but suffer together with the good news according to the power of God.
Who saved us and who called us with a holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before times eternal.
But which has now been manifested by the appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who indeed abolished death, and brought life and immortality to light through the good news,
for which I was appointed a herald, and an apostle, and a teacher of Gentiles.
Because of which reason I also suffer these things. But I am not ashamed, for I know him whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to preserve my consignment for that day.
Hold the pattern of sound words that thou heard from me, in faith and love in Christ Jesus.
Guard the good consignment through the Holy Spirit that dwells in us.
This thou know, that all those in Asia turned away from me, of whom are Phygellus and Hermogenes.
May the Lord grant mercy to the house of Onesiphorus, because he often refreshed me and was not ashamed of my chain.
But when he happened to be in Rome he sought me more diligently and found me
(may the Lord grant him to find mercy from the Lord in that day), and in how many things he ministered at Ephesus, thou know very well.

Thou therefore, my child, be strong in the grace in Christ Jesus.
And what thou have heard from me through many witnesses, these things commit thou to faithful men who will be competent to teach others also.
Thou therefore endure hardship as a good soldier of Jesus Christ.
No man who serves in the military entangles himself in the affairs of life, so that he may please the man who enlisted the army.
And also if any man competes, he is not crowned unless he competes lawfully.
The farmer who labors must be the first to partake of the fruits.
Consider what I say, for may the Lord give thee understanding in all things.
Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, of the seed of David, according to my good news,
within which I suffer evil to the point of bonds as an evildoer, but the word of God is not bound.
Because of this I endure all things because of the chosen, so that they also may experience salvation in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.
Faithful is the saying, For if we die together, we will also live together.
If we endure, we will also reign together. If we renounce him, that man will also renounce us.
If we are unfaithful, that man remains faithful. He cannot renounce himself.
Remind them of these things, solemnly testifying in the sight of the Lord, not to brawl verbally, to nothing useful, to the ruin of those who hear.
Be diligent to present thyself approved to God, an irreproachable workman, correctly traversing the word of truth.
But shun profane babblings, for they will advance to greater impiety,
and their word will have a feeding field like gangrene, of whom are Hymenaeus and Philetus,
men who missed the mark about the truth, saying the resurrection happened already, and they overthrow the faith of some.
Nevertheless the firm foundation of God stands, having this seal, The Lord knows those who are his, and, Let every man who names the name of the Lord keep away from unrighteousness.
Now in a great house there are not only gold and silver vessels, but also wood and earthen, and some for esteem and some for disesteem.
If therefore any man purges himself from these things, he will be a vessel for esteem, sanctified and useful to the master, prepared for every good work.
And flee juvenile impulses, but pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those who call upon the Lord out of a pure heart.
But shun foolish and uneducated questions, knowing that they breed quarrels.
And a bondman of the Lord must not quarrel, but be gentle to all, able to teach, patient,
in meekness correcting those who oppose. Perhaps God may grant them repentance for recognition of the truth,
and they may sober up out of the snare of the devil, having been captured by him for his will.

But know this, that in the last days perilous times will come.
For men will be lovers of self, lovers of money, boasters, arrogant, blasphemous, disobedient to parents, ungrateful, impious,
devoid of natural affection, irreconcilable, slanderous, without self-control, savage, no lovers of good,
traitors, reckless, beclouded, lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God,
having a form of piety, but repudiating the power of it. Now turn away from these men,
for from these are those who creep into houses, and take captive petty women laden with sins, being led away by various impulses,
ever learning and never able to come to knowledge of truth.
And by which way Jannes and Jambres opposed Moses, so also do these oppose the truth. Men corrupted in mind, worthless about the faith.
But they will not advance in much more, for their folly will be evident to all men, as also that of those men came to be.
But thou have closely followed my doctrine, conduct, purpose, faith, longsuffering, love, perseverance,
persecutions, sufferings, such as happened to me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra. I endured such persecutions, and the Lord rescued me out of them all.
And also all those who want to live devoutly in Christ Jesus will be persecuted.
But evil men and impostors will go forward to worse, leading astray and being led astray.
But continue thou in what thou learned and were convinced of, knowing from whom thou learned them.
And that from a babe thou have known the sacred writings, which are able to make thee wise for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus.
Every scripture is inspired by God and useful for instruction, for reproof, for correction, for discipline in righteousness,
so that the man of God may be qualified, having been completed for every good work.

I solemnly testify therefore before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who is going to judge the living and the dead at his appearing and his kingdom,
preach the word, stand ready in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering and teaching.
For there will be time when they will not tolerate sound doctrine, but they will accumulate teachers to themselves according to their own desires, who tickle the ear,
and will indeed turn the ear away from the truth, and will be turned aside to myths.
But be thou sober in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an evangelist, bring thy ministry to fullness.
For I am already poured out a libation, and the time of my dissolution is imminent.
I have fought the good fight, I have finished the course, I have kept the faith.
Henceforth there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, will award to me in that day, and not to me only, but also to all those who have loved his appearing.
Hurry to come to me quickly,
for Demas forsook me having loved the present age, and he went to Thessalonica, Crescens to Galatia, Titus to Dalmatia.
Only Luke is with me. Having taken Mark, bring him with thee, for he is useful to me for service.
But Tychicus I sent to Ephesus.
Bring the cloak that I left behind at Troas with Carpus when thou come, and the books, especially the parchments.
Alexander the coppersmith did many evil things to me. May the Lord repay him according to his works,
of whom thou also beware, for he extremely opposed our words.
At my first defense no man came with me, but all forsook me. May it not be reckoned to them.
But the Lord stood by me and strengthened me, so that through me the sacred message might be brought to fullness, and all the Gentiles might hear. And I was rescued out of the mouth of the lion.
And the Lord will rescue me from every evil work, and will save me for his heavenly kingdom, to whom is the glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Salute Prisca and Aquila, and the house of Onesiphorus.
Erastus remained at Corinth, but Trophimus I left being sick at Miletus.
Hurry to come before winter. Eubulus salutes thee, and Pudens, and Linus, and Claudia, and all the brothers.
The Lord Jesus Christ is with thy spirit. Grace is with you. Truly.

Titus

Paul, a bondman of God and an apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of the chosen of God, and the knowledge of truth according to piety,
in hope of eternal life, which the non-lying God promised before times eternal,
but in his own times he made known his word by preaching, which I was entrusted according to the commandment of God our Savior,
Grace, mercy, peace from God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ our Savior.
That thou should set in order the things lacking, and appoint elders in every city as I commanded thee,
if any man is blameless, the husband of one wife, having believing children, not with an accusation of debauchery or insubordinate.
For the overseer must be blameless as a steward of God, not self-willed, not prone to anger, not a drunkard, not a fighter, not greedy of base gain,
but a lover of strangers, a lover of good, serious minded, just, devout, self-controlled,
holding firm the faithful word according to the teaching, so that he may also be able to exhort by the sound doctrine, and to correct those who contradict.
For there are also many insubordinate men, vain talkers and deceivers, especially those from circumcision,
who must be muzzled, men who subvert whole houses, teaching things that they ought not, for sake of ugly profit.
A certain man of themselves, a prophet of their own, said, Cretans are always liars, evil beasts, lazy bellies.
This testimony is true, because of which reason, reprove them harshly, so that they may be sound in the faith,
not giving heed to Jewish myths, and commandments of men who turn away from the truth.
Truly to the pure all things are pure, but to those who are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure, but both their mind and their conscience are defiled.
They profess to know God, but in their works they deny him, being abominable, and disobedient, and worthless for every good work.

But speak thou the things that are fitting for the sound doctrine.
Aged men are to be sober, noble, serious minded, sound in faith, in love, in perseverance.
Aged women likewise be reverent in behavior, not slanderous, not enslaved to much wine, teachers of what is good,
so that they may admonish the young women to be sensible, to love their husbands, to love their children,
to be serious-minded, pure, homemakers, good, submissive to their own husbands, so that the word of God may not be blasphemed.
Likewise exhort the younger men to be sober-minded.
incorruption, dignity, incorruptibility,
sound speech, irreproachable, so that the man of opposition may be ashamed, having nothing bad to say about us.
Bondmen are to be obedient to their own masters, to be well-pleasing in all things, not speaking contrary,
not pilfering, but demonstrating all good fidelity, so that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Savior in all things.
For the saving grace of God has appeared to all men,
disciplining us, so that, having denied irreverence and worldly lusts, we should live soberly and righteously and piously in the present age.
Awaiting the blessed hope and appearance of the glory of our great God and Savior Jesus Christ,
who gave himself for us, so that he might redeem us from all lawlessness, and purify to himself a special people, a zealot of good works.
These things speak and exhort and rebuke with every command. Let no man disregard thee.

Remind them to be submissive to principle offices and positions of authority, to be obedient, to be prepared for every good work,
to slander no man, to be noncontentious, gentle, showing all meekness to all men.
For we also were formerly foolish, disobedient, being led astray, serving various lusts and pleasures, living in evil and envy, hateful, hating each other.
But when the kindness and philanthropy of God our Savior appeared,
he saved us, not of works in righteousness that we did, but according to his mercy through the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit,
which he poured out upon us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our Savior.
So that, having been made righteous by the grace of that man, we may become heirs according to the hope of eternal life.
Faithful is the saying. And I want thee to strongly insist about these things, so that those who have believed in God may be careful to manage good works. These things are good and beneficial to men.
But avoid foolish questionings, and genealogies, and contentions, and legalistic fightings, for they are useless and vain.
Shun a factious man after a first and second admonition,
knowing that such a man is perverted, and sins, being self-condemned.
When I will send Artemas to thee, or Tychicus, be diligence to come to me in Nicopolis, for I have decided to winter there.
Help Zenas the lawyer and Apollos on their way diligently, so that nothing may be lacking for them.
And also let our men learn to be in the lead of good works for the essential needs, so that they may not be unfruitful.
All those with me salute thee. Salute those who love us in faith. Grace is with all of you. Truly.

Philemon

Paul, a prisoner of Christ Jesus, and Timothy the brother, to Philemon our beloved and co-workman,
Grace to you and peace from God our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.
I thank my God, making recollection of thee always in my prayers,
hearing of thy love and faith, which thou have toward the Lord Jesus and for all the sanctified,
so that the fellowship of thy faith may become potent (in the knowledge of every good thing in us) for Christ Jesus.
For we have much joy and encouragement in thy love, because the bowels of the sanctified have been refreshed by thee, brother.
Therefore, though I have much boldness in Christ to command thee that which is befitting,
because of love I rather beseech, being such as aged Paul, and now also a prisoner of Jesus Christ.
I beseech thee for my child Onesimus, whom I begot in my bonds.
A man formerly unprofitable to thee, but now is profitable to thee and to me, whom I sent back.
And thou should welcome him, that is, my bowels.
Whom I wanted to keep back for myself, so that in thy behalf he might serve me in the bonds of the good news.
But I wanted to do nothing without thy mind, so that thy goodness might not be as from obligation, but from volition.
For perhaps because of this he departed for an hour, so that thou might receive him back forever,
no longer as a bondman, but above a bondman, a beloved brother, especially to me, but how much more to thee, both in flesh and in the Lord.
If then thou have me a partner, accept him as myself.
But if he has wronged thee, or owes anything, charge this to me.
I Paul write with my hand, I will repay, so that I may not say to thee that thou owe me in return even thyself.
Yes, brother, let me have a favor of thee in the Lord. Refresh my bowels in the Lord.
Being confident in thine obedience I wrote to thee, knowing that thou will do above what I say.
But simultaneously also prepare a lodging for me, for I hope that by your prayers I will be granted to you.
Epaphras, my fellow prisoner in Christ Jesus, salutes thee,
and Mark, Aristarchus, Demas, Luke, my co-workmen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ is with your spirit. Truly.

Hebrews

God, who formerly spoke in many portions and in many ways to the fathers by the prophets, spoke to us in these last days by a Son,
whom he appointed heir of all things, through whom also he made the ages.
Who, being the radiance of his glory, and the exact image of his essence, and upholding all things by the word of his power, having made purification of our sins through himself, he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty in the heights.
Having become so much better than the agents, as he has inherited a more excellent name than they.
For to which of the agents did he ever say, Thou are my Son, today I have begotten thee? And again, I will be to him for a Father, and he will be to me for a Son?
And again when he brings the firstborn into the world he says, And let all the agents of God worship him.
And indeed toward the agents he says, He who makes his agents spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire.
But toward the Son, Thy throne, O God, is into the age of the age. The scepter of thy kingdom is a scepter of straightness.
Thou have loved righteousness and hated lawlessness. Because of this, God, thy God, anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy companions.
And thou, Lord, at the beginnings founded the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy hands.
They will perish, but thou are permanent. And they will all become old as a garment.
And thou will roll them up as a mantle, and they will be changed. But thou are the same, and thy years will not cease.
But to which of the agents has he ever said, Sit thou by my right hand until I place thine enemies a footstool of thy feet?
Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth for service for the sake of those who are going to inherit salvation?

Because of this we ought to give more earnest heed to the things that were heard, lest we might slip away.
For if the word spoken through agents became certain, and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward,
how will we escape, having neglected so great a salvation? Which first, having taken to be spoken by the Lord, was verified for us by those who heard;
God also testifying simultaneously by signs and wonders, and by various powers and distributions of the Holy Spirit according to his will.
For he did not subject the coming world to agents, about which we speak.
But a certain man has somewhere testified, saying, What is man, that thou remember him? Or a son of man, that thou help him?
Thou made him a little something less than the agents. Thou crowned him with glory and honor.
Thou subordinated all things under his feet. For in subordinating all things to him, he left nothing not subordinate to him. But now we do not yet see all things subordinated to him.
But we see Jesus who has been made a little something less than the agents, who, because of the suffering of death, has been crowned with glory and honor, so that by the grace of God he would taste of death for every man.
For it was fitting for him, through whom are all things, and because of whom are all things, having brought many sons to glory, to make the pathfinder of their salvation fully perfect through sufferings.
For both he who sanctifies and those being sanctified are all of one, because of which reason he is not ashamed to call them brothers,
saying, I will declare thy name to my brothers. In the midst of the congregation I will sing praise to thee.
And again, I will be a man who has trusted in him. And again, Behold, I and the children that God has given me.
Since therefore the children have partaken of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise shared the same things, so that through death he might make him who has the power of death impotent, that is, the devil.
And he might liberate these, as many as throughout all their lifetime were deserving of bondage, with a specter of death.
For he certainly did not embrace agents, but he embraced the seed of Abraham.
Therefore he was obligated to be made like his brothers in accordance with all things, so that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in things toward God, in order to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.
For in that he himself has suffered, having been tempted, he is able to help those being tempted.

Because of which, holy brothers, companions of a heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our affirmation, Jesus Christ,
who was faithful to him who appointed him, as also was Moses in all his house.
For this man was considered worthy of more glory than Moses, by so much as he who built it has more esteem than the house.
For every house is built by some man, but he who built all things is God.
And Moses was indeed faithful in all his house as a servant, for a testimony of the things that were going to be spoken,
but Christ as a Son over his house, whose house we are, if only we keep in possession our confidence and pride of hope, firm until the end.
Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says, Today if ye hear his voice,
do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion, according to the day of the trial in the wilderness,
where your fathers challenged me, tested me, and saw my works forty years.
Therefore I was angry with that generation, and said, They are always led astray in their heart, and they did not know my ways.
So I swore in my wrath, They will not enter into my rest.
Watch, brothers, lest there will be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in withdrawing from the living God.
But exhort each other during each day, while it is called Today, lest any of you may be hardened by the deceitfulness of sin.
For we have become companions of the Christ, if only we keep in possession the primacy of the essence, steadfast until the end,
while it is said, Today if ye will hear his voice, do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion.
For some who heard rebelled, but not all those who came out of Egypt by Moses.
But with whom was he angry forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness?
And to whom did he swear were not going to enter into his rest, if not to those who were disobedient?
And we see that they were not able to enter in because of unbelief.

Let us be afraid therefore, lest, a promise being left behind to enter into his rest, any of you should seem to have come short.
For we also are having good news preached, just as also those men, but the word of hearing did not benefit those men, not having been mixed together with faith in those who heard.
For those who believe enter into that rest, just as he said, So I swore in my wrath, They will not enter into my rest, although the works occurred from the foundation of the world.
For he spoke somewhere about the seventh this way, And God rested during the seventh day from all his works,
and in this again, They will not enter into my rest.
Since therefore it remains for some to enter into it, and those who formerly had good news did not enter because of disobedience,
again he appoints a certain day, Today, saying in David after so long a time (as it is said), Today if ye will hear his voice, do not harden your hearts.
For if Joshua had given them rest, he would not have spoken about another day after these things.
There remains therefore a sabbath for the people of God.
For a man who has entered into his rest, he has also rested from his works, as God did from his own.
Let us therefore be diligent to enter into that rest, so that not any man may fall by the same example of disobedience.
For the word of God is living, and potent, and sharper, above every two-edged sword, and piercing as far as the division both of soul and spirit, of both joints and marrow, and discernible of the thoughts and intentions of the heart.
And there is no creature concealed from his presence, but all things are naked and vulnerable to his eyes, before whom is the word to us.
Having therefore a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us take hold of the affirmation.
For we do not have a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but who was tempted in all things in the same way, without sin.
Let us therefore come near with boldness to the throne of grace, so that we may take mercy, and may find grace for timely help.

For every high priest taken from men is appointed for men in things toward God, so that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins.
Who can be gentle to those who are ignorant and led astray, since he himself is also encompassed with weakness.
And because of this he is obligated, as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins.
And not any man takes the honor to himself, but being called by God, just as also Aaron.
So also Christ did not glorify himself to become a high priest, but it was he who said to him, Thou are my Son, today I have begotten thee.
(And just as he says in another, Thou are a priest into the age according to the order of Melchizedek.)
Who, in the days of his flesh, having offered up both prayers and supplications with strong shouting and tears to him who was able to save him from death, and who was heard because of his reverence,
although being a Son, he learned obedience from the things that he suffered.
And having been fully perfected, he became the source of eternal salvation to all those who obey him,
having been designated by God a high priest according to the order of Melchizedek.
About whom, much subject matter from us is also difficult to explain, since ye have become sluggish in hearing.
For also men who ought to be teachers because of the time, ye have need again for some man to teach you the rudiments of the beginning of the oracles of God, and have become men who have need of milk, and not of solid food.
For every man partaking of milk is unskilled in the word of righteousness, for he is childlike.
But solid food is for mature men, those having their sensibilities trained through practice for the discernment of both good and evil.

Therefore having left the word of the primacy of Christ, let us be brought forward to perfection, not again laying a foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith toward God,
of doctrine of washings, and of laying on of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment.
And this we will do, if of course God will permit.
For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and who tasted of the heavenly gift, and who became partakers of the Holy Spirit,
and who tasted the good word of God and the powers of the coming age,
and who fell away, to restore again to repentance, crucifying to themselves the Son of God, and disgracing him publicly.
For the soil that has drunk the rain often coming upon it, and bringing forth vegetation useful for those by whom also it is cultivated, partakes of a blessing from God.
But producing thorns and thistles it is unfit and near a curse, the end of which is for burning.
But we are persuaded better things about you, beloved, and things that have salvation, even though we speak this way.
For God is not unrighteous to forget your work, and the labor of love that ye showed toward his name, having served the sanctified, and who are serving.
And we earnestly desire each of you to show the same diligence toward the full assurance of the hope until the end,
so that ye may not become lazy, but imitators of those who, through faith and longsuffering, inherit the promises.
For God who promised to Abraham, since he had none greater to swear by, swore by himself,
saying, Surely indeed, blessing I will bless thee, and multiplying I will multiply thee.
And this way, having patiently endured, he obtained the promise.
For men certainly swear by the greater, and of every dispute with them the oath is final for confirmation.
By which God, wanting to demonstrate more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the immutableness of his resolve, confirmed it by an oath.
So that by two immutable events, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we may have strong encouragement, having fled for refuge to seize the hope being openly displayed.
Which we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and that enters into the interior of the veil,
where the forerunner, Jesus, entered for us, having become a high priest into the age according to the order of Melchizedek.

For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of God Most High, having met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings, also blessed him.
To whom also Abraham divided a tenth of all. Being actually translated, first, king of righteousness, and then also, king of Salem, which is king of peace,
without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but having been made like the Son of God, remains a priest continually.
And notice how great this man was, to whom also the patriarch Abraham gave a tenth out of the best spoils.
Now indeed those of the sons of Levi who receive the priesthood have commandment to collect tithes from the people according to the law, that is, of their brothers, although having come out of the loins of Abraham.
But the man who did not descend from them has received tithes from Abraham, and has blessed the man having the promises.
And without all contradiction the inferior is blessed by the superior.
And here indeed, men who die receive tithes, but there, he who is testified about that he lives.
And, so to speak, Levi also, the man who receives tithes, has paid tithes through Abraham,
for he was still in the loins of his father when Melchizedek met him.
If indeed therefore perfection was through the Levitical priesthood (for under it the people had received the law), what further need is there for another priest to arise according to the order of Melchizedek, and not be designated according to the order of Aaron?
For the priesthood being changed, of necessity a change of law also occurs.
For he of whom these things are spoken pertains to another tribe, from which no man has attended to the altar.
For it is evident that our Lord arose out of Judah, regarding which tribe Moses spoke nothing about the priesthood.
And it is still far more evident, if according to the likeness of Melchizedek, there arises another priest,
who has become, not according to a law of a carnal commandment, but according to the power of an indestructible life.
For he testifies, Thou are a priest into the age according to the order of Melchizedek.
For indeed there becomes an annulment of a preceding commandment because of its weakness and uselessness
(for the law made nothing fully perfect), and an introduction of a better hope, through which we approach God.
And inasmuch as it is not without an oath. For actually those who become priests are so without an oath,
but he with an oath, because of him who says to him, The Lord swore and will not change his mind, Thou are a priest into the age according to the order of Melchizedek.
By so much, Jesus has become the surety of a better covenant.
And of course those who have become priests are more, because of being prevented to continue by death,
but he, because of his remaining into the age, has the priesthood unchangeable.
Whereupon he is able also to save to the uttermost those who come to God through him, being always alive in order to intercede on their behalf.
For such a high priest is fitting for us, devout, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners, and having become higher than the heavens.
Who has no need to offer up sacrifices each day, as those high priests, first for his own sins, then for those of the people, for this he did, once, when he offered up himself.
For the law appoints men high priests who have weakness, but the word of the oath after the law, a Son who has been fully perfected into the age.

Now a summation about the things being spoken is, we have such a high priest who was seated at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens,
a minister of the holy things, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord erected and not man.
For every high priest is appointed in order to offer both gifts and sacrifices, whereupon it is necessary for this man also to have something that he may offer.
For certainly if he were on earth, he would not even be a priest, there being the priests who offer the gifts according to the law,
who serve for an example and shadow of the heavenly things. Just as Moses who was divinely warned while going to complete the tabernacle, for he says, See thou make all things according to the pattern that was shown thee on the mountain.
But now he has obtained a superior ministry, by so much as he is also the mediator of a superior covenant, which has been enacted upon superior promises.
For if that first one was faultless, no place would have been sought for a second.
For, finding fault with them, he says, Behold, the days come, says the Lord, and I will perfect a new covenant with the house of Israel and with the house of Judah.
Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when I took them by my hand to lead them out of the land of Egypt. Because they did not continue in my covenant, and I disregarded them, says the Lord.
Because this is the covenant that I will ordain with the house of Israel after those days, says the Lord, giving my laws into their mind, and I will write them on their hearts. And I will be to them for a God, and they will be to me for a people.
And they will, no, not teach each man his fellow citizen, and each man his brother, saying, Know the Lord, because all will know me, from their small as far as their great.
Because I will be merciful to their iniquities, and their sins and their lawlessness I will no, not further remember.
In saying, New, he has made the first old. And what is becoming old and obsolete is near disappearance.

Now indeed therefore the first had ordinances of divine service and the earthly sanctuary.
For a tabernacle was prepared, the first in which was also the lampstand, and the table, and the presentation of the loaves, which is called the Holy place.
And behind the second curtain, the tabernacle called the Holy of holies,
having a golden censer, and the ark of the covenant overlaid entirely in gold, in which was a golden pot holding the manna, and Aaron's rod that budded, and the tablets of the covenant.
And above it were cherubim of glory overshadowing the place of forgiveness, about which things it is not now to speak in detail.
And these things thus having been prepared, the priests indeed enter into the first part of the tabernacle continually, accomplishing the services.
But into the second part, the high priest alone, once a year, not without blood, which he offers for himself and for the unintentional sins of the people,
this signifying from the Holy Spirit, the way into the holy things is not yet to be made known while the first tabernacle still remains.
Which is a figure for the present time, according to which both gifts and sacrifices are offered that are not able to make the man officiating fully perfect in respect to conscience,
carnal ordinances imposed until a time of reformation.
But Christ, having arrived a high priest of the good things that are coming, through the greater and more perfect tabernacle not made with hands, that is, not of this creation,
and not through the blood of goats and calves, but through his own blood, he entered in once into the Holy things, having found eternal redemption.
For if the blood of bulls and goats, and the ashes of a heifer, sprinkling those who were defiled, sanctifies for the purification of the flesh,
how much more the blood of Christ, who, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself unblemished to God, will cleanse your conscience from dead works in order to serve a living God?
And because of this he is mediator of a new covenant, so that a death having occurred for the redemption of the transgressions against the first covenant, those who are called might take the promise of the eternal inheritance.
For where a covenant is, a necessity is to present the death of the man who made the covenant.
For a covenant is effective with the dead, since it is never enforced while the man who made the covenant lives.
Whereupon neither has the first been dedicated without blood.
For of every commandment according to law that was spoken by Moses to all the people, after taking the blood of the calves and goats, with water and scarlet wool and hyssop, he sprinkled both the book itself and all the people,
saying, This is the blood of the covenant that God made for you.
And likewise he sprinkled with the blood both the tabernacle and all the vessels of the service.
And almost all things, according to the law, are cleansed with blood, and remission does not occur without bloodshed.
Indeed therefore, a necessity was for the models of the things in the heavens themselves to be cleansed with these, but the heavenly things with better sacrifices than these.
For the Christ entered not into a holy place made with hands, representative of the true, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us.
And not so that he might offer himself often, as the high priest enters into the Holy things each year with blood by another,
since it would be necessary for him to suffer often, from the foundation of the world. But now once, at the end of the ages, he was made known for an annulment of sin by the sacrifice of himself.
And inasmuch as it is reserved to men once to die, and after this, judgment,
so also the Christ, having been offered once in order to take up the sins of many, will appear a second time, independent of sin, to those waiting for him for salvation.

For the law having a shadow of the good things that are coming, not the same substance of the events, with the same sacrifices that are offered continually each year, they are never able to fully perfect those who are approaching.
Otherwise would they not have ceased being offered, because of those who worship, once having been cleansed, to have no further conscience of sins?
But in them is a reminder of sins each year.
For it is impossible for the blood of bulls and goats to take away sins.
Therefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, but thou prepared for me a body.
In whole burnt offerings, and for sin thou were not pleased.
Then I said, Lo, I come (in the volume of a book it is written about me) to do thy will, O God,
saying above, Sacrifice and offering and whole burnt offerings and for sin thou did not desire, nor were thou pleased with things that are offered according to the law.
Then he said, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God. He takes away the first, so that he may establish the second.
By which will we are sanctified through the one time offering of the body of Jesus Christ.
And indeed every priest stands daily serving and offering the same sacrifices often, which can never take away sins.
But this man, having offered one sacrifice on behalf of sins forever, sat down at the right hand of God,
waiting henceforth until his enemies are placed a footstool of his feet.
For by one offering he has fully perfected forever those being sanctified.
And the Holy Spirit also testifies to us, after indeed foretelling,
This is the covenant that I will ordain with them after those days, says the Lord, giving my laws on their hearts, and on their minds I will write them,
and, Their sins and their lawlessness I will, no, not further remember.
Now where there is remission of these, there is no more offering for sin.
Having therefore, brothers, boldness for entrance into the holy things by the blood of Jesus,
which he inaugurated for us, a new and living way through the curtain, that is, his flesh,
and a great priest over the house of God,
let us approach with a true heart in full assurance of faith, our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our body washed in pure water.
Let us hold firm the affirmation of the hope unwavering, for he who promised is faithful.
And let us examine each other for provocation of love and good works.
Not forsaking the assembling together of ourselves, as is the habit of some, but exhorting, and so much the more as long as ye see the day approaching.
For when we sin willfully after taking the knowledge of the truth, there remains no more a sacrifice for sins,
but a certain fearful expectation of judgment and of fire, a fervor that is going to devour the opposition.
Any man who has disregarded the law of Moses dies without mercies from two or three witnesses.
By how much worse punishment do ye think he will deserve who has trampled the Son of God, and who considered profane the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and who treated the Spirit of grace contemptuously?
For we know him who said, Vengeance is for me, I will repay, says the Lord. And again, The Lord will judge his people.
It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God.
But remember the former days, in which, after being enlightened, ye endured a great contest of sufferings,
partly made a spectacle, both by reviling and afflictions, and partly having become companions of those so treated.
For ye were both compassionate about my bonds, and ye accepted with joy the plundering of your possessions, knowing yourselves to have a superior and an enduring existence in the heavens.
Therefore do not throw off your boldness, which has great recompense of reward.
For ye have need of perseverance, so that, having done the will of God, ye may receive the promise.
For yet a very little while, he who is coming will come, and will not delay.
But the righteous man will live from faith, and if he should withdraw, my soul is not pleased with him.
But we are not of retreat for destruction, but of faith for the preservation of the soul.

Now faith is the foundation of hoping, the evidence of events not being seen.
For by this the ancients were well reported.
By faith we understand the ages to have been prepared by the word of God. For the things that are seen do not come to be from that which is visible.
By faith Abel offered to God a better sacrifice than Cain, because of which he was reported to be righteous, God testifying about his gifts, and through it, he who died still speaks.
By faith Enoch was transferred to not see death, and he was not found, because God transferred him. For before his removal he was reported to be pleasing to God.
And apart from faith it is impossible to please him. For he who comes to God must believe that he is, and becomes a rewarder of those who search for him.
By faith Noah, being divinely warned about things not yet seen, moved with awe, prepared an ark for the salvation of his house, through which he condemned the world, and became an heir of righteousness according to faith.
By faith Abraham, when called, obeyed to go out to the place that he was going to take for an inheritance. And he went out, not knowing where he was going.
By faith he lived alien in the land of promise as a foreigner, having dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the fellow heirs of the same promise.
For he anticipated the city that has the foundations, whose builder and architect is God.
By faith even Sarah herself received power for conception of seed, and she gave birth beyond the time of age, because she considered him faithful who promised.
And therefore from one man, and these things having become deadened, were begotten as the stars of the heaven for multitude, and as the sand of the seashore, countless.
All these died in faith, not having taken the promises, but who saw and greeted them from afar, and who confessed that they were foreigners and sojourners on the earth.
For those who say such things show that they are seeking a fatherland.
And if indeed they remembered that from which they came out, they would have had time to return.
But now they aspire for a superior one, that is, a heavenly one. Therefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God, for he has prepared for them a city.
By faith Abraham, being tested, offered Isaac. And he who received the promises offered his only begotten son,
about whom it was said, The seed by thee will be called in Isaac.
Having reckoned that God is able to raise up even from the dead, from where also, in a figure, he did receive him back.
By faith Isaac blessed Jacob and Esau about things coming.
By faith Jacob, while dying, blessed each of the sons of Joseph, and bowed in worship upon the top of his staff.
By faith Joseph, while perishing, remembered about the exodus of the sons of Israel, and commanded about his bones.
By faith Moses, after being born, was hid three months by his parents, because they saw the child well-formed, and they were not afraid of the king's edict.
By faith Moses, having become great, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter,
having chosen rather to be mistreated with the people of God, than to have the pleasure of sin temporarily.
Having esteemed the vilification of the Christ greater wealth than the treasures of Egypt, for he focused toward the recompense of reward.
By faith he forsook Egypt, not having feared the wrath of the king, for he persevered as seeing the invisible.
By faith he performed the Passover and the sprinkling of the blood, so that he who was destroying the firstborn would not touch them.
By faith they passed through the Red sea as by dry land, of which the Egyptians, having taken an attempt, were drowned.
By faith the walls of Jericho fell down, having been encircled for seven days.
By faith Rahab the harlot was not destroyed with those who were disobedient, having received the spies with peace.
And what shall I say further? For the time would fail me telling about Gideon, also Barak and Samson and Jephthah, also of David and Samuel and the prophets,
who, through faith, conquered kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises, closed the mouths of lions,
quenched the force of fire, escaped the jaw of the sword. Out of weakness were made strong, became mighty in war, bowed down armies of aliens.
Women took hold of their dead from a resurrection, but others were tortured, not having accepted deliverance, so that they might experience a superior resurrection.
And others took a trial of mockings and scourgings, and moreover of bonds and imprisonment.
They were stoned, they were sawed apart, they were tempted, they died in murder by sword. They wandered about in sheepskins, in goatskins, being destitute, restricted, tormented
(of whom the world was not worthy), wandering in deserts and mountains and caves, and the holes of the earth.
And all these, having been well reported through faith, did not receive the promise,
God having foreseen something superior concerning us, so that without us they would not be made fully perfect.

Therefore we also, having so great a cloud of witnesses surrounding us, having put off every weight and cleverly entangling sin, let us run by perseverance the contest being set before us.
Looking to Jesus the pathfinder and perfecter of the faith, who, against the joy set before him, endured a cross, having despised the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God.
For consider the man who endured such hostility against him by sinners, so that ye may not be weary in your souls, being disheartened.
Ye have not yet resisted as far as blood, struggling against sin.
And have ye forgotten the exhortation that reasons with you as with sons, My son, do not disparage the chastening of the Lord, nor become disheartened when punished by him?
For whom the Lord loves he chastens. And he whips every son whom he receives.
Because of chastening ye endure; God is treating you as with sons, for what son is there whom a father does not chasten?
And if ye are without chastening, of which all have become participants, then ye are bastards, and not sons.
Besides, we indeed have had chastisers-the fathers of our flesh-and we were turned around. Shall we not much more be subordinate to the Father of the spirits, and we will live?
For those men indeed for a few days chastened us according to that which seemed good to them, but he for that which is advantageous, in order to be partakers of his holiness.
But of course no chastening for the present seems to be of joy but of sorrow, yet afterward it yields peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it.
Therefore lift up the drooping hands, and the feeble knees,
and make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be turned away, but may be healed instead.
Pursue peace with all men, and the sanctification without which no man will see the Lord.
Looking carefully lest any man fall short, away from the grace of God, lest any root of bitterness sprouting up would cause trouble, and by this many may be defiled,
lest a fornicator or profane man like Esau, who, in place of one meal sold his birthright.
For ye also know that wanting afterward to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of repentance, though having sought it with tears.
For ye have not come to a mountain being felt, and which burned with fire, and to darkness, and gloom, and a tempest,
and a sound of a trumpet, and a voice of words, of which those who heard begged that a word not be added to them.
For they did not bear that which was commanded, if even a beast should touch the mountain, it shall be stoned.
And so fearful was that which was made visible, that Moses said, I am terrified and trembling.
But ye have come to mount Zion, and to the city of a living God, a heavenly Jerusalem, and to myriads of agents,
to a festal gathering and assembly of firstborn sons who were enrolled in the heavens, and to God, a Judge of all, and to spirits of righteous men who were made fully perfect,
and to Jesus a mediator of a new covenant, and to blood of sprinkling that speaks better than Abel.
Watch, that ye not refuse him who speaks. For if those men did not escape, having refused him who spoke a divine message on earth, much more we, those who turn away from him from the heavens,
whose voice then shook the earth. But now he has promised, saying, Yet once, I shake not only the earth, but also the heaven.
And the, Yet once, signifies the removal of the things being shaken-as of things that were made-so that the things not being shaken may remain.
Therefore, receiving an immovable kingdom, we may have grace, through which we may serve God acceptably with reverence and awe.
For our God is also a consuming fire.

Let brotherly love abide.
Do not forget love for strangers, for by this some lodged agents, unaware.
Remember the prisoners as being in bondage together, those who are ill-treated as also yourselves being in the body.
Marriage is precious in every way, and the undefiled bed, but God will judge fornicators and adulterers.
The Way of life is to be without love of money, being content with the things that are present, for he has said, I will, no, not leave thee, and also, I will, no, not forsake thee.
So then we have confidence to say, The Lord is a helper to me, and I will not fear. What will man do to me?
Remember those who lead you, men who spoke the word of God to you, of whom, carefully observing the outcome of their conduct, imitate the faith-
Jesus Christ, the same yesterday and today, and into the ages.
Be not carried away by various and foreign doctrines. For it is good that the heart be established with grace, not with foods by which those who walked were not benefited.
We have an altar from which they have no right to eat, those officiating at the tabernacle.
For of the beasts whose blood is brought into the holy things for sin by the high priest, the bodies of these are burned outside the camp.
Therefore Jesus also, so that he might sanctify the people through his own blood, suffered outside the gate.
Let us therefore go forth to him outside the camp, bearing his reproach.
For here we have no enduring city, but we seek that which is coming.
Through him therefore, let us offer up a sacrifice of praise to God continually, that is, fruit of lips acknowledging his name.
But do not forget benevolence and fellowship, for God is well pleased with such sacrifices.
Have confidence in those who lead you, and yield yourselves, for they watch for your souls as men who will render account, so that they may do this with joy, and not groaning, for this is unprofitable for you.
Pray about us, for we trust that we have a good conscience, desiring to behave well in all things.
But I urge you to do this even more, so that I may be restored to you sooner.
Now the God of peace, who brought up from the dead the great Shepherd of the sheep by the blood of an eternal covenant-our Lord Jesus-
may he make you fully qualified in every good work in order to do his will, doing in you what is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory into the ages of the ages. Truly.
And I urge you, brothers, bear with the word of exhortation, for I also wrote to you in brief.
Know ye, brother Timothy who was set free is with whom I will see you, if he comes sooner.
Salute all those who lead you, and all the sanctified. The men from Italy salute you.
Grace is with you all. Truly.

James

James, a bondman of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve tribes in the Dispersion, greeting.
Consider it all joy, my brothers, when ye encounter various trials,
knowing that the testing of your faith produces perseverance.
And let perseverance have a perfect work, so that ye may be perfect and complete, falling short in nothing.
And if any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask from God who gives to all generously and not reproaching, and it will be given to him.
But let him ask in faith, doubting nothing, for he who doubts is like a wave of the sea driven by wind and tossed about.
For that man should not think that he will receive anything from the Lord,
a double-minded man, unstable in all his ways.
Now let the lowly brother boast in his exaltation,
but the rich in his lowliness, because as a flower of grass he will pass away.
For the sun rose up with the burning heat, and withered the grass. And the flower of it fell, and the beauty of its appearance perished. So also the rich man will fade away among his pursuits.
Blessed is a man who endures temptation, because, having become approved, he will receive the crown of life, which the Lord promised to those who love him.
Let no man say when he is tempted, I am tempted by God, for God is without temptation of evils, and he himself tempts no man.
But each man is tempted by his own lust, being drawn away and enticed.
Then the lust having conceived, it gives birth to sin, and after being complete the sin brings forth death.
Be not led astray, my beloved brothers.
Every good gift and every perfect endowment is from above, coming down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation nor shadow of turning.
Having deliberated, he begot us by the word of truth for us to be a certain first fruit of his creatures.
Therefore, my beloved brothers, let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak, slow to wrath.
For the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God.
Therefore having put off all filthiness and profusion of evil, receive with meekness the engrafted word, which is able to save your souls.
But become ye doers of the word, and not hearers only, deceiving yourselves.
Because if any man is a hearer of the word and not a doer, this resembles a man observing his natural face in a mirror.
For he observes himself, and goes away, and straightaway forgets what kind of man he was.
But he who stooped to look into the perfect law, the one of liberty, and who remained, this man, who did not become a forgetful hearer but a doer of work, this man will be blessed in his doing.
If any man among you seems to be religious, not bridling his tongue but deceiving his heart, this man's religion is futile.
Pure religion and undefiled from God and the Father is this, to go help the orphaned and the widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world.

My brothers, ye should not have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ of glory, in favoritism.
For if a man with a gold ring in bright clothing comes into your synagogue, and also a poor man in dirty clothing comes in,
and ye have regard for the man wearing the bright clothing, and say to him, Sit thou here well, and ye say to the poor man, Stand thou there, or sit here below my footstool,
then are ye not partial among yourselves, and become judges from evil thoughts?
Listen, my beloved brothers, did not God choose the poor of the world, rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, which he promised to those who love him?
But ye have dishonored the poor man. Do not the rich exploit you, and they themselves drag you into courts?
Do they not blaspheme the good name that was called upon you?
If ye indeed fulfill the royal law according to the scripture, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thyself, ye do well.
But if ye respect personages, ye work sin, being convicted by the law as transgressors.
For whoever keeps the whole law, and stumbles on one, he has become guilty of all.
For he who said thou shall not commit adultery, also said thou shall not murder. Now if thou will not commit adultery, but murder, thou have become a transgressor of law.
So speak ye, and so do ye, as men who are to be judged by a law of liberty.
For the judgment is merciless to him who did no mercy. Mercy triumphs over judgment.
What is the benefit, my brothers, if some man should say to have faith, but has no works? Can the faith save him?
And if a brother or sister may be unclothed, and may be destitute of daily food,
and some man of you would say to them, Go in peace, be ye warmed and fed, but ye would not give them the things necessary for the body, what is the benefit?
So also faith, if it has no works, is dead by itself.
But some man will say, Thou have faith, and I have works. Show me thy faith from thy works, and I will show thee from my works my faith.
Thou believe that there is one God, thou do well. The demons also believe, and shudder.
But do thou want to know, O vain man, that faith apart from works is dead?
Was not Abraham our father made righteous from works, having offered up Isaac his son upon the altar?
Thou see that faith was working with his works, and from the works, faith was fully perfected.
And the scripture was fulfilled, which says, And Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him for righteousness, and he was called a friend of God.
Ye see therefore that from works a man is made righteous, and not from faith only.
And likewise also was not Rahab the harlot made righteous from works, having received the agents, and having sent them out another way?
For as the body without a spirit is dead, so also faith without the works is dead.

Not many should become teachers, my brothers, knowing that we will receive greater judgment.
For we all stumble in many things. If any man does not stumble in word, this is a perfect man, able also to bridle the whole body.
Behold we put bits into the mouths of horses for them to obey us, and we guide about their whole body.
Behold also the ships, being so great and driven by fierce winds, are guided about by a very small rudder, wherever the impulse of the man who steers determines.
So also the tongue is a little body-part, and boasts greatly. Behold a little fire, how much wood it kindles.
And the tongue is a fire, the world of unrighteousness. Thus, the tongue is made to lead among our body-parts, defiling the whole body, and setting the cycle of nature on fire, and being set on fire by hell.
For every species, both of beasts and of birds, both of creeping things and things in the sea, is tamed, and has been tamed by the human species.
But no man is able to tame the tongue of men, an unruly evil, full of deadly poison.
By it we bless the God and Father, and by it we curse men, who were made according to a likeness of God.
Out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and curse. My brothers, these things ought not to happen this way.
Does the spring pour out from the same opening the sweet and the bitter?
A fig tree, my brothers, cannot make olives, or a grapevine figs. In the same way, no one spring makes water salty and sweet.
Who is wise and understanding among you? Let him show from his good behavior his works in meekness of wisdom.
But if ye have bitter envy and selfish ambition in your heart, do not boast, and do not lie against the truth.
This wisdom is not descending from above, but is earthly, world-soul, demonic.
For where envy and selfish ambition are, there is instability and every evil deed.
But the wisdom from above is indeed first pure, then peaceful, gentle, easily entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, impartial and non-hypocritical.
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace to those who make peace.

from your pleasures warring in your body-parts?
Ye desire and do not have, so ye murder. And ye envy and cannot obtain, so ye fight and make war. Ye do not have, because ye do not ask.
Ye ask, and do not receive, because ye ask wrongly, so that ye may spend on your pleasures.
Ye adulterers and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of the world is hatred of God? Whoever therefore wants to be a friend of the world becomes an enemy of God.
Or think ye that the scripture says vainly, The Spirit that he caused to dwell in us yearns with jealousy?
But he gives greater grace. Therefore it says, God is opposed to the arrogant, but gives grace to the lowly.
Be subordinate therefore to God, but resist the devil and he will flee from you.
Approach God and he will approach you. Cleanse the hands, ye sinners, and purify the hearts, ye double-minded.
Be ye sorrowful, and mourn, and weep. Let your laughter be turned into mourning, and your joy into a downcast look.
Be ye made lower in the sight of the Lord, and he will lift you up.
Speak not against each other, brothers. He who speaks against a brother and judges his brother, speaks against law and judges law. But if thou judge law, thou are not a doer of law, but a judge.
There is one lawgiver who is able to save and to destroy, but thou, who are thou who judge the other man?
Go now, men who say, Today and tomorrow we will go into this city, and will operate one year there, and will engage in trade and will get gain-
men who know not of the morrow. For what is your life? For it will be a vapor that appears for a little while, and then also vanishes away-
in place of your saying, If the Lord should will, then we will live and do this or that.
But now ye boast in your arrogance. All such boasting is evil.
He therefore who knows to do good, and is not doing it, to him it is sin.

Go now, ye rich, weep, howling for your miseries that are approaching.
Your wealth has decayed, and your garments have become moth-eaten.
Your gold and your silver have cankered, and their corrosion will be testimony against you, and will eat your flesh like fire. Ye have hoarded in the last days.
Behold the wage of the workmen who reaped your fields. The man who was defrauded by you cries out. And the outcries of those who reaped have entered into the ears of the Lord of hosts.
Ye have lived in luxury on the earth, and were self-indulgent. Ye have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.
Ye have condemned, ye have murdered the righteous man. He is not hostile to you.
Be patient therefore, brothers, until the coming of the Lord. Behold, the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth, being patient for it, until it receives the early and latter rain.
Be ye also patient. Establish your hearts, because the coming of the Lord has approached.
Do not grumble, brothers, against each other, so that ye not be judged. Behold, the judge stands before the doors.
Take an example, my brothers, of evil-suffering and longsuffering, the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
Behold, we regard those who endured, blessed. Ye have heard of the fortitude of Job, and have seen the outcome of the Lord, that he is very compassionate and merciful.
But above all things, my brothers, swear not. Neither by the heaven, nor the earth, nor any other oath, but let your yes be yes, and the no, no, so that ye may not fall into hypocrisy.
Is any man among you afflicted? Let him pray. Is any cheerful? Let him sing praise.
Is any man weak among you? Let him summon the elders of the congregation, and let them pray near him, having anointed him with olive oil in the name of the Lord.
And the prayer of faith will rescue him who is depressed, and the Lord will rouse him. And if he should be a man who has committed sins, they will be forgiven him.
Confess ye the trespasses to each other, and pray for each other so that ye may be healed. A working supplication of a righteous man is very powerful.
Elijah was a man of the same nature as we. And by prayer, he asked for it not to rain, and it did not rain on the earth for three years and six months.
And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and the earth produced its fruit.
Brothers, if any man among you may be led astray from the truth, and some man converts him,
let him know that he who converts a sinful man from his wandering way, will save a soul from death, and will hide a multitude of sins.

I Peter

Peter, an apostle of Jesus Christ, to the chosen who are sojourners of the Dispersion of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia,
Grace to you, and peace be multiplied.
Blessed is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who begot us again according to his abundant mercy for a living hope by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead,
for an inheritance imperishable, and undefiled, and unfading, reserved in heavens for you,
men being kept by the power of God through faith for a salvation ready to be revealed in the last time.
In which ye greatly rejoice, although made sorrowful in various trials. Since it is now necessary for a little while,
so that the proof of your faith, much more precious than gold that perishes, and though proven by fire, may be found for praise and esteem and for glory at the revealing of Jesus Christ.
Whom, not having seen, ye love, in whom, not now seeing but believing, ye exult in inexpressible and glorified joy,
receiving back the outcome of your faith, the salvation of souls.
About which salvation the prophets sought and searched diligently. Men who prophesied about the grace for you,
searching for what, or what kind of time the Spirit of Christ in them indicated, predicting the sufferings in Christ, and the glories after these things.
To whom it was revealed, that they were serving not themselves, but you, those things that were now reported to you by those who preached good news to you in the Holy Spirit, which was sent forth from heaven, into which things agents longed to stoop to see.
Therefore having girded up the loins of your mind, being sober, hope entirely for the grace brought to you at the revealing of Jesus Christ.
As children of obedience, not fashioning yourselves to the former desires in your ignorance,
but according to the Holy Man, he who called you, ye yourselves also become holy in all conduct,
because it is written, Become ye holy, since I am holy.
And if ye call on a Father, him who judges impartially according to each man's work, live the time of your sojourn in fear.
Knowing that ye were redeemed from your vain behavior inherited from fathers, not with perishable silver or gold,
but by precious blood, as of a lamb unblemished and unspotted-of Christ,
men who, because of him, believe in God who raised him from the dead, and gave him glory, in order for your faith and hope to be in God;
men who have purified your souls in obedience of the truth through the Spirit for non-hypocritical brotherly love. Ye should love each other fervently from a pure heart,
begotten again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, through the word of God that lives and remains into the age.
Because all flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as a flower of grass. The grass withers, and the flower of it falls away,
but the word of the Lord endures into the age. And this is the word, the good news that was preached to you.

Therefore, having put off all evil and all deceit and hypocrisies and envies and all evil speaking,
as newborn babes, long for the genuine intellectual milk, so that ye may grow by it,
if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is excellent.
Coming to whom, a living stone, rejected indeed by men, but with God chosen, precious,
ye also, as living stones, are built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
It is therefore contained in the scripture, Behold, I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, chosen, precious. And he who believes in him will, no, not be shamed.
To you therefore who believe is the preciousness, but for men who disobey, A stone that the builders rejected, this became the head of the corner,
and, A stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, men who stumble at the word, being disobedient, for which also they were set.
But ye are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for an acquired possession, so that ye might broadly proclaim the excellencies of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light.
Men formerly not a people, but now are a people of God. Men who had not obtained mercy, but who now have obtained mercy.
Beloved, I beseech you as aliens and sojourners, to abstain from the fleshly lusts, which war against the soul.
Having your behavior good among the Gentiles, so that, upon which they speak against you as evildoers, they may glorify God in the day of visitation, from having observed your good works.
Therefore because of the Lord, ye should submit to every human establishment, whether to a king as being supreme,
or to governors as being sent by him for vengeance of evildoers and praise of well-doers.
Because this way is the will of God, doing good to muzzle the ignorance of the foolish men.
As free, and not having your freedom as a cover-up of evil, but as bondmen of God.
Respect all men. Love the brotherhood. Fear God. Respect the king.
Household servants, submitting to the masters with all fear, not only to the good and gentle, but also to the wayward.
For this is graciousness, if, because of consciousness of God, any man endures sorrows, suffering wrongfully.
For what kind of credit is it, if, sinning and being beaten, ye will endure? But if, doing good and suffering, ye will endure, this is graciousness with God.
For ye were called for this. Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving you an example, so that ye should follow his footsteps.
Who did no sin, nor was deceit found in his mouth.
Who, being reviled, did not revile in return. Suffering, he did not threaten, but yielded to him who judges righteously.
Who himself took up our sins in his body upon the tree, so that we, having died to sins, might live to the righteousness of him from whose wound ye were healed.
For ye were like sheep going astray, but now were returned to the Shepherd and Guardian of your souls.

Likewise the wives, being subordinate to their own husbands, so that even if any are disobedient to the word, they will be gained without a word by the behavior of the wives,
observing, in fear, your pure behavior.
Of which let it not be the outward world of braiding of hair, and of wearing of gold, or of putting on apparel,
but the hidden man of the heart, in the incorruptible, of the meek and quiet spirit, which is very precious in the sight of God.
For this way formerly also, the holy women, trusting in God, adorned themselves, being subordinate to their own husbands,
as Sarah obeyed Abraham, calling him lord, whose children ye became, doing good, and not being afraid of anything fearful.
Likewise the husbands living together knowledgeably, as with a weaker vessel, apportioning worth to the female as also joint-heirs of the grace of life, for your prayers not to be hindered.
And finally, all be like-minded, sympathetic, brother-loving, compassionate, friendly,
not rendering evil for evil, or reviling for reviling, but instead giving praise, knowing that ye were called for this, so that ye might inherit a blessing.
For he who wants to love life, and see good days, let him restrain his tongue from evil, and his lips not to speak deceit.
Let him turn away from evil, and do good. Let him seek peace, and pursue it.
Because the eyes of the Lord are toward the righteous, and his ears to their supplication, but the face of the Lord is against men who do evil things.
And who is he who will harm you, if ye become imitators of the good?
But even if ye should suffer because of righteousness, ye are blessed. But do not fear their terror nor be shaken,
but sanctify the Lord God in your hearts. And always be ready for a defense to every man who asks you a word about the hope in you, with meekness and fear.
Having a good conscience, so that, in what they speak against you as of evildoers, they may be ashamed, those who revile your good behavior in Christ.
For it is better to suffer doing good, if the will of God desires, than for doing evil.
Because Christ also once suffered for sins, a righteous man for unrighteous men, so that he might bring you to God. Having indeed been killed in flesh, but made alive in spirit,
in which also, having gone, he preached to the spirits in prison
who were disobedient formerly, when the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah who prepared an ark in which a few, that is, eight souls were saved through water.
Which counterpart-immersion-now also saves us, not the putting away of filth of flesh, but an appeal of a good conscience toward God, through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
who is at the right hand of God, having gone into heaven, agents, and positions of authority, and powers having been subordinated to him.

Therefore of Christ having suffered in flesh for us, arm ye yourselves also with the same mentality, because he who has suffered in flesh has ceased from sin,
in order to live the remaining time in flesh, no longer by lusts of men, but by the will of God.
For enough time of life has past for you to accomplish the will of the Gentiles, having gone in debaucheries, lusts, excesses of wine, revelings, drinking parties, and lawless idolatries.
During which they think it strange of you not running together into the same pouring out of debauchery, while they slander.
Men who will give back an accounting to him who fares readily to judge the living and the dead.
For good news was preached even to the dead for this, so that they might indeed be judged according to men in flesh, but live according to God in spirit.
But the end of all things has approached. Therefore be serious, and be sober for the prayers.
And above all having fervent love for yourselves, because love will cover a multitude of sins,
stranger-loving toward each other without complaints.
As each has received a gift, serving it for yourselves, as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
If any man speaks, as oracles of God. If any man serves, as of ability as God supplies. So that God may be glorified in all things through Jesus Christ, to whom is the glory and the dominion into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Beloved, ye should not be surprised at the fieriness in you, which occurs for a trial to you, like a strange thing happening to you.
But rejoice in so far as ye are partakers in the sufferings of the Christ, so that also at the revealing of his glory ye may rejoice, having exceeding joy.
Blessed are ye if ye are reviled for the name of Christ, because the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you. From them he is indeed blasphemed, but from you he is glorified.
For let not any man of you suffer as a murderer, or a thief, or an evildoer, or as a busybody.
But if as a Christian, let him not be ashamed, but let him glorify God in this regard.
Because the time to begin judgment is from the house of God, and if first from us, what is the end of those who disobey the good news of God?
And if the righteous man is scarcely saved, where will the irreverent and sinful man appear?
Therefore also let those who suffer according to the will of God entrust their souls as to a faithful Creator by well-doing.

Tend ye the flock of God among you, watching over, not by obligation, but willingly, nor greedily, but readily,
nor as domineering over the lots, but becoming examples of the flock.
And when the chief Shepherd is made known, ye will receive the unfading crown of glory.
Likewise younger men should be subordinate to the elder men. And all being subordinate to each other, clothe yourselves with humility, because God sets himself against the haughty, but gives grace to the lowly.
Therefore be lowered under the mighty hand of God, so that he may lift you up in time,
having cast all your concern upon him, because he cares for you.
Be sober, be vigilant. Your opponent the devil, as a roaring lion, walks about seeking whom to devour.
Whom resist, steadfast in the faith, knowing the same sufferings are to be accomplished in the world by your brotherhood.
And may the God of all grace who called you to his eternal glory in Christ Jesus (after suffering a little while) himself thoroughly prepare you. He will establish, strengthen, and provide a foundation.
To him is the glory and the dominion into the ages of the ages. Truly.
By Silvanus, the faithful brother to you, as I reckon, I wrote because of a few things, exhorting and testifying this to be the true grace of God in which ye stand.
She in Babylon, chosen together, salutes you, and my son Mark.
Salute each other by a kiss of love. Peace to you, to all those in Christ Jesus. Truly.

II Peter

Grace to you and peace be multiplied in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord,
as all things of his divine power to us, things toward life and piety, which were granted through the knowledge of him who called us through glory and virtue.
Because of which, the precious and greatest promises have been given to us, so that through these ye might become companions of the divine nature, having escaped from the corruption in the world in lust.
Now this same thing also, having applied all eagerness, furnish in your faith, virtue, and in virtue, knowledge,
and in knowledge, self-control, and in self-control, perseverance, and in perseverance, piety,
and in piety, brotherly affection, and in brotherly affection, love.
For these things existing in you and abounding, it leads to not being idle nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
For he in whom these things are not present is blind, being near-sighted, having deliberately forgotten the purification of his former sins.
Therefore, brothers, instead be diligent to make your calling and selection sure, for doing these things, ye would, no, not ever stumble.
For so the entrance will be furnished to you abundantly into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.
Therefore I will not neglect to always remind you about these things, although having known them, and having been established in the present truth.
But I think it right, inasmuch as I am in this tent, to arouse you in memory.
Knowing that the putting off of my tent is imminent, even as also our Lord Jesus Christ indicated to me.
And also I will endeavor for you to always have, after my departure, the memory of these things to apply.
For we revealed to you the power and presence of our Lord Jesus Christ, not men who followed in cunningly devised myths, but men who became eyewitnesses of the majesty of that man.
For having received from God the Father honor and glory from a voice of such kind brought to him from the Majestic Glory, This is my Son, the beloved in whom I am well pleased.
And we heard this voice, which was brought out of heaven, being with him on the holy mountain.
And we have the prophetic word sure, to which ye do well giving heed, as to a lamp shining in a dark place, until the day dawns, and the daystar arises in your hearts.
Knowing this first, that no prophecy of scripture comes to pass of a personal interpretation.
For no prophecy was ever brought by a will of man, but holy men of God spoke, being led by the Holy Spirit.

But false prophets also developed among the people, as false teachers will also be among you, who will sneak in pernicious denominations, even denying the Master who bought them, bringing upon themselves swift destruction.
And many will follow their wantonness, because of whom the way of the truth will be blasphemed.
And they will exploit you in greed with fabricated words, whose judgment is not idle for long, and their destruction will not slumber.
For if God did not spare agents who sinned, but delivered them up to chains of darkness, having been cast into hell being reserved for judgment,
and he did not spare the ancient world, but preserved Noah, the eighth, a herald of righteousness, when he brought on a flood upon the world of the irreverent,
and he condemned the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah to destruction, being reduced to ashes, having made an example of men who were going to be irreverent,
and he rescued righteous Lot, being distressed by the conduct of the lawless in their licentiousness
(for that righteous man dwelling among them day after day, in the sight and hearing of their lawless deeds, it anguished his righteous soul),
the Lord knows how to rescue the pious out of temptation, and to hold in reserve unrighteous men being cut off for a day of judgment.
And especially those going rear of flesh in a degenerate lust, and who despise lordship. Reckless, self-willed men, they do not tremble when speaking evil of dignities.
Whereas agents, being greater in might and power, do not bring a railing judgment against them before the Lord.
But these men, like irrational beasts of nature, having been born for capture and destruction, speaking evil at which things they do not understand, will be destroyed in their corruption,
getting back a wage of unrighteousness. Men who consider soft living in the daytime to be pleasure, spots and blemishes reveling in their deceitfulness, feasting together with you,
having eyes full of adultery, and unceasing sin, enticing unstable souls, having a heart trained in greed, children of a curse,
having forsaken a straight path, they were led astray, men who followed the way of Balaam, son of Beor, who loved the wage of unrighteousness.
But he had a rebuke of his own lawbreaking. A mute donkey, uttering in a man's voice, restrained the madness of the prophet.
These men are waterless wells, and clouds driven by a fierce wind, for whom the gloom of darkness has been reserved into an age.
For, uttering swollen things of vanity, they entice (to sensuality by lusts of flesh) those who actually escaped from those who live in error,
promising them freedom, while they themselves are bondmen of corruption, for by what any man has been overcome, of this he has also been enslaved.
For if, having escaped the defilements of the world by knowledge of the Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, and, having been again entangled in these, they are overcome, the last things have become worse for them than the first.
For it were better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than having known it, to turn back from the holy commandment delivered to them.
But that of the true proverb has happened to them, The dog returning to his own vomit, and the sow that washed to wallowing in mire.

I write to you now this second letter, beloved, in which I arouse your sincere mind by a reminder,
to remember the sayings that were earlier spoken by the holy prophets, and of the command of your apostles of the Lord and Savior.
Knowing this first, that there will come at the end of the days, scoffers, proceeding according to their own desires,
and saying, Where is the promise of his coming? For, from since the fathers became asleep, all things continue this way from the beginning of creation.
For this is willfully ignored by them, that long ago there were heavens, and an earth that came together out of water and by water by the word of God,
by which the world then perished, having been overflowed with water.
But now the heavens and the earth, which have been stored up by the same word, are being preserved for fire in a day of judgment and destruction of irreverent men.
But beloved, let not this one thing be ignored by you, that one day with the Lord is as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
The Lord is not slack about his promise, as some regard slackness, but is patient toward us, not wanting any to perish, but all to go forward to repentance.
But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, during which the heavens will pass away with a roar, and the elements, being intensely hot, will be disintegrated, and the earth and the works in it will be destroyed by fire.
Therefore, all these things being disintegrated, what kind ought ye to be in holy actions and pieties,
anticipating and hastening the coming of the day of God, by which the heavens, being made fiery hot, will be disintegrated, and the elements dissolve, being intensely hot?
But we anticipate a new heavens and a new earth according to his promise, in which righteousness dwells.
Therefore, beloved, anticipating these things, be diligent to be found by him in peace, without spot and blameless.
And consider the longsuffering of our Lord, salvation, just as also our beloved brother Paul wrote to you according to the wisdom given to him,
as also in all his letters, speaking in them about these things, in which are some things hard to understand, which the ignorant and unstable twist, as also the other scriptures, to their own destruction.
Ye therefore, beloved, knowing in advance, keep watch, lest, having accommodated to the error of the lawless, ye fall from your own steadfastness.
But grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. To him is the glory both now and into the day of the age. Truly.

I John

What was from the beginning, what we have heard, what we have seen with our eyes, what we looked upon, and our hands touched, concerning the Word of life
(and the life was made known, and we have seen, and testify, and declare to you the eternal life that was with the Father, and was made known to us),
what we have seen and heard we also declare to you, so that ye also may have fellowship with us. Even also our fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.
And we write these things to you, so that our joy may be made full.
And this is the message that we have heard from him and declare to you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.
If we say that we have fellowship with him and walk in the darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with each other, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from every sin.
If we say that we have no sin, we lead ourselves astray, and the truth is not in us.
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and righteous so that he will forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from every unrighteousness.
If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his word is not in us.

My little children, I write these things to you so that ye may not sin. And if any man does sin, we have an advocate with the Father-righteous Jesus Christ.
And he is the atonement for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the whole world.
And by this we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments.
He who says, I know him, and does not keep his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in this man.
But whoever keeps his word, truly in this man the love of God is fully perfected. By this we know that we are in him.
He who claims to abide in him he also ought so to walk just as that man walked.
Brothers, I write no new commandment to you, but an old commandment that ye had from the beginning. The old commandment is the word that ye heard from the beginning.
Again, a new commandment I write to you, which is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing away, and the true light now shines.
He who claims to be in the light, and hates his brother, is in the darkness until now.
He who loves his brother abides in the light, and no cause of stumbling is in him.
But he who hates his brother is in the darkness, and he goes about in the darkness, and knows not where he goes, because the darkness has blinded his eyes.
I write to you, little children, because your sins have been forgiven you through his name.
I write to you, fathers, because ye have known him from the beginning. I write to you, young men, because ye have overcome evil. I write to you, children, because ye know the Father.
I wrote to you, fathers, because ye have know him from the beginning. I wrote to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome evil.
Love not the world, nor the things in the world. If any man loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him.
Because everything in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the arrogance of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world.
And the world passes away, and the lust of it, but he who does the will of God abides into the age.
Children, it is the last hour. And as ye heard that the antichrist comes, and now many antichrists have developed, from which we know that it is the last hour.
They went out from us, but they were not of us. For if they were of us, they would have continued with us, but-so that they might be made known, that they are not all of us.
And ye have an anointing from the Holy, and ye know all the things.
I wrote to you not because ye know not the truth, but because ye know it, and because no lie is of the truth.
Who is the liar if not he who denies that Jesus is the Christ? This is the antichrist, he who denies the Father and the Son.
Every man who denies the Son, also does not have the Father.
Therefore ye, let what ye heard from the beginning abide in you. If what ye heard from the beginning abides in you, ye also will abide in the Son and in the Father.
the eternal life.
I wrote these things to you concerning those who lead you astray.
And for you, the anointing that ye received from him abides in you, and ye have no need that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you about all things, and is true and is no lie, and just as it taught you, ye will abide in him.
And now, little children, abide in him, so that when he is made known, we may have confidence, and not be shamed by him at his coming.
If ye know that he is righteous, know ye that every man doing righteousness has been begotten of him.

Behold what kind of love the Father has given to us, that we may be called children of God. Because of this the world does not know you, because it did not know him.
Beloved, now we are children of God, and it is not yet made known what we will be. But we know that whenever he is made known we will be like him, because we will see him as he is.
And every man who has this hope in him purifies himself, just as that man is pure.
Every man doing sin also does lawlessness, and sin is lawlessness.
And ye know that that man was made known so that he might take up our sins. And in him is no sin.
Every man abiding in him does not sin. Every man who is sinning has not seen him, nor has known him.
Little children, let no man lead you astray. He who is doing righteousness is righteous, just as that man is righteous.
He who is doing sin is of the devil, because the devil sinned from the beginning. The Son of God was made known for this, so that he might destroy the works of the devil.
Every man who has been begotten of God is not doing sin, because his seed abides in him, and he cannot sin, because he has been begotten of God.
By this the children of God are visible, and the children of the devil. Every man not doing righteousness is not of God, and he who is not loving his brother.
Because this is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love each other.
Not as Cain. He was of the wicked, and murdered his brother. And why did he murder him? Because his works were wrong, and his brother's right.
Marvel not, my brothers, if the world hates you.
We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brothers. He who is not loving the brother abides in death.
Every man hating his brother is a man-killer. And ye know that no man-killer has eternal life abiding in him.
By this we know love, because that man laid down his life for us. And we ought to lay down our lives for the brothers.
But whoever has the world's living, and sees his brother having need, and closes his bowels from him, how does the love of God abide in him?
My little children, we should not love in word, nor with the tongue, but in deed and in truth.
And by this we know that we are of the truth, and will assure our hearts before him.
Because if our heart should condemn us, that God is greater than our heart, and knows all things.
Beloved, if our heart should not condemn us, we have confidence toward God,
and whatever we may ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments and do things pleasing in his sight.
And this is his commandment, that we should believe in the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love each other, just as he gave command.
And he who keeps his commandments abides in him, and he in him. And by this we know that he abides in us, from the Spirit that he gave us.

Beloved, do not believe every spirit, but examine the spirits, whether they are of God, because many false prophets have gone out into the world.
every spirit that confesses Jesus Christ having come in flesh is of God,
and every spirit that does not confess Jesus Christ has come in flesh is not of God. And this is that of the antichrist, which ye have heard that it comes, and is now in the world already.
Ye are of God, little children, and ye have overcome them, because greater is he in you than he in the world.
They are of the world. Because of this they speak of the world, and the world hears them.
We are of God. He who knows God hears us. He who is not of God does not hear us. From this we know the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error.
Beloved, we should love each other. Because love is of God, and every man who loves has been begotten of God, and knows God.
He who does not love does not know God, because God is love.
By this the love of God was made known in us, because God sent his Son, the only begotten, into the world so that we might live through him.
In this is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son, an atonement for our sins.
Beloved, if God so loved us, we also are obligated to love each other.
No man has ever seen God. If we love each other, God abides in us, and his love is in us, having been fully perfected.
In this we know that we abide in him and he in us, because he has given us from his Spirit.
And we have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son, a Savior of the world.
Whoever acknowledges that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God.
And we know, and have believed the love that God has in us. God is love, and he who abides in love abides in God, and God abides in him.
By this love has been fully perfected with us, so that we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because just as that man is, we also are in this world.
Fear is not in love, but perfect love casts out fear, because fear holds punishment, and he who is afraid has not been fully perfected in love.
We love him, because he first loved us.
If any man says, I love God, and hates his brother, he is a liar. For he who does not love his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen?
And we have this commandment from him, so that he who loves God will also love his brother.

Every man who believes that Jesus is the Christ has been begotten from God, and every man who loves him who begot, also loves him who has been begotten from him.
By this we know that we love the children of God, when we love God and keep his commandments.
For this is the love of God, that we may keep his commandments. And his commandments are not burdensome.
Because everything that has been begotten from God overcomes the world. And this is the victory that overcomes the world, our faith.
And who is he who overcomes the world, if not he who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
This is he who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ, not by the water only, but by the water and the blood. And it is the Spirit that testifies, because the Spirit is truth.
the Spirit, and the water, and the blood. And the three are in one.
If we accept the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater. Because this is the testimony of God that he has testified about his Son.
He who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. He who does not believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has testified about his Son.
And this is the testimony, that God gave eternal life to us, and this life is in his Son.
He who has the Son has the life. He who does not have the Son of God does not have the life.
I wrote these things to you, those who believe in the name of the Son of God, so that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe in the name of the Son of God.
And this is the confidence that we have toward him, that, if we ask anything according to his will, he hears us.
And if we know that he hears us, whatever we may ask, we know that we have the requests that we have asked from him.
If any man may see his brother sinning a sin not toward death, he will ask, and he will give life to him, to those not sinning toward death. There is sin toward death. I do not say that he should make request about that.
All unrighteousness is sin. And there is sin not toward death.
We know that every man who has been begotten from God does not sin, but he who was begotten from God keeps himself, and the evil does not touch him.
We know that we are of God, and the whole world is set in the evil.
And we know that the Son of God comes, and has given us understanding, so that we may know the true. And we are in the true, in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and the eternal life.
Little children, guard yourselves from the idols. Truly.

II John

The elder to the chosen lady and her children, whom I love in truth, and not only I, but also all those who know the truth,
because of the truth that abides in us, and will be with us into the age.
Grace, mercy, peace will be with us from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of the Father, in truth and love.
I rejoice exceedingly that I have found of thy children walking in truth, just as we received commandment from the Father.
And now I beseech thee, lady, not as writing a new commandment to thee, but what we had from the beginning, that we would love each other.
And this is love, that we should walk according to his commandments. This is the commandment, just as ye heard from the beginning, that ye should walk in it.
Because many deceivers have gone forth into the world, those not acknowledging Jesus Christ coming in flesh. This is the deceiver and the antichrist.
Watch yourselves, so that we may not lose what we have wrought, but may receive a full reward.
Every man transgressing, and not abiding in the doctrine of the Christ, does not have God. The man abiding in the doctrine of the Christ, this man has both the Father and the Son.
If any man comes to you, and does not bring this doctrine, do not receive him into a house, and do not speak to him to rejoice.
For he who speaks to him to rejoice, partakes of his evil works.
Having many things, I did not want to write to you by paper and ink, but I hope to come to you, and to speak mouth to mouth, so that our joy may be filled.
The children of thy chosen sister salute thee. Truly.

III John

The elder to the beloved Gaius, whom I love in truth.
Beloved, I pray for thee to prosper concerning all things, and to be healthy, just as thy soul prospers.
For I rejoiced exceedingly of brothers coming and testifying to the truth of thee, just as thou walk in truth.
I have no greater joy than these things that I hear my children walking in truth.
Beloved, thou do a faithful thing, whatever thou work for the brothers and for strangers,
who testified about thy love in sight of the congregation, whom thou will do well having helped send on their way worthily of God.
For they went forth on behalf of the Name, taking nothing from the Gentiles.
We therefore ought to welcome such men, so that we might become fellow workmen for the truth.
I wrote to the congregation, but Diotrephes, who loves to be first of them, did not accept us.
Because of this, if I come, I will remember his works that he does, prating against us with evil words. And not being satisfied in these, he himself does not even accept the brothers, and he forbids those who would, and expels them out of the congregation.
Beloved, do not imitate the evil, but the good. The man doing right is of God. The man doing wrong has not seen God.
Demetrius has been testified by all, and by the truth itself. But we also testify, and ye know that our testimony is true.
I had many things to write, but I did not want to write to thee by pen and ink.
But I hope to see thee straightaway, and we will speak mouth to mouth. Peace to thee. The friends salute thee. Salute the friends by name.

Jude

Mercy to you and peace and love be multiplied.
Beloved, making all diligence to write to you about the common salvation, I had need to write to you exhorting you to earnestly contend for the faith that was once for all delivered to the sanctified.
For certain men have sneaked in, those written about formerly for this condemnation, irreverent men, perverting the grace of our God into licentiousness, and denying our only Master God, and our Lord Jesus Christ.
Now I want to remind you, ye having known this once, that the Lord, having saved a people out of the land of Egypt, afterward destroyed those who did not believe.
And the agents who did not keep their own principality, but left their own habitation, he has kept reserved in eternal bonds under darkness for the judgment of the great day.
As Sodom and Gomorrah, and the cities around them, the same kind of way with these who indulged in fornication, and who went rear of queer flesh, are set forth an example, undergoing the punishment of eternal fire.
Nevertheless in the same way also these men who dream, indeed defile flesh, and reject lordship, and speak evil of dignities.
But Michael the arch-agent, when he disputed with the devil, contending about the body of Moses, dared not bring a railing judgment, but said, May the Lord rebuke thee.
But these men indeed revile whatever they have not seen. But whatever they understand naturally, as the irrational beasts, in these things they are corrupted.
Woe to them! Because they went in the way of Cain, and rushed to the error of Balaam's reward, and perished in the rebellion of Korah.
These are reefs in your love-feasts, feasting together, fearlessly tending to themselves, waterless clouds carried along by winds, autumn trees without fruit, who died twice having being uprooted,
wild waves of the sea foaming out their own shame, wandering stars for whom the gloom of darkness has been reserved into an age.
And Enoch also, the seventh from Adam, prophesied about these men, saying, Behold, the Lord came with his holy myriads,
to execute judgment against all, and to convict all the irreverent of them about all the works of their own irreverence that they have done irreverently, and about all the harsh things that irreverent sinners spoke against him.
These are grumblers, fault-finders, going according to their lusts, and their mouth speaks overblown things, marveling personages for the sake of advantage.
But ye, beloved, remember the sayings previously spoken by the apostles of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that they told you that there will be scoffers during the last time, going according to their own desires of irreverences.
These are those who make divisions, world-soul men, not having Spirit.
But ye beloved, building up yourselves in your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit,
keep yourselves in the love of God, awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ for eternal life.
And on some be ye merciful-being discerning.
And in fear save some, snatching them out of the fire, hating even the garment that was stained by the flesh.
Now to him who is able to keep them non-stumbling, and to present before his glory, unblemished in gladness,
to the only wise God our Savior, is glory, majesty, dominion and power, both now and into all the ages. Truly.

Revelation of John

The Revelation of Jesus Christ that God gave him to show his bondmen what must happen quickly. And he signified it, having sent by his agent to his bondman John
who testified the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ, as many things as he saw.
Blessed is he who reads, and those who hear the words of the prophecy, and who keep the things written in it, for the time is near.
Grace to you and peace from God, who is and who was and who is coming, and from the seven Spirits that are before his throne,
and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn of the dead, and the ruler of the kings of the earth. To him who loves us and washed us from our sins by his blood
and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father, to him is the glory and the dominion into the ages of the ages. Truly.
Behold, he comes with the clouds and every eye will see him, even the men who pierced him. And all the tribes of the earth will wail against him. Yea, Truly.
I am the Alpha and the Omega, says the Lord, the God who is and who was and who is coming, the Almighty.
I John, your brother and companion in the tribulation and kingdom and perseverance in Christ Jesus, happened to be on the isle that is called Patmos because of the word of God, and because of the testimony of Jesus Christ.
I became in spirit on the Lord's day and I heard behind me a great voice like a trumpet
to Ephesus, and to Smyrna, and to Pergamos, and to Thyatira, and to Sardis, and to Philadelphia, and to Laodicea.
And I turned there to see the voice that spoke with me. And having turned I saw seven golden lampstands.
And in the midst of the seven lampstands, resembling a son of man, he who was clothed down to the foot, and girded about with a golden belt at the breasts.
And his head and hair were white as wool, white as snow, and his eyes as a flame of fire,
and his feet resembling highly refined metal, as in a furnace having been fiery hot, and his voice as the sound of many waters,
and having in his right hand seven stars, and a sharp two-edged sword coming out of his mouth. And the sight of him was as the sun shines in its strength.
And when I saw him, I fell at his feet as dead. And he laid his right hand upon me, saying, Fear not, I am the first and the last,
and he who lives. And I became dead, and behold, I am living into the ages of the ages. Truly. And I have the keys of death and of Hades.
Therefore write the things that thou saw, and things that are, and things that are going to happen after these things.
the seven stars are agents of the seven congregations, and the seven lampstands that thou saw are the seven congregations.

I know thy works, and thy toil, and thy perseverance, and that thou cannot tolerate evil, and thou examined those who say themselves to be apostles, and are not, and found them false.
And thou have perseverance. And thou endured because of my name, and did not become weary.
Nevertheless, I have against thee because thou left thy first love.
Remember therefore from where thou have fallen, and repent and do the first works. And if not, I come to thee quickly, and will move thy lampstand out of its place, if thou do not repent.
But this thou have, that thou hate the works of the Nicolaitans, which I also hate.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations. To him who overcomes, I will give him to eat from the tree of life that is in the midst of the paradise of my God.
I know thy works and tribulation and poverty (but thou are rich), and the blasphemy of those who say themselves to be Jews, and are not, but are a synagogue of Satan.
Fear none of the things that thou are going to suffer. Behold, the devil is indeed going to cast some of you into prison, so that ye may be tried, and ye will have tribulation ten days. Become thou faithful until death, and I will give thee the crown of life.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations. He who overcomes will, no, not be hurt from the second death.
I know thy works, and where thou dwell, where Satan's throne is. And thou hold firm my name, and did not deny my faith in the days in which Antipas was my faithful witness, who was killed among you where Satan dwells.
But I have a few things against thee, because thou have there men who adhere to the teaching of Balaam, who taught Balak to cast a snare before the sons of Israel, even to eat idol sacrifices, and to fornicate.
So also thou have men who likewise adhere to the teaching of the Nicolaitans.
Repent therefore, and if not I come to thee quickly, and will war against them with the sword of my mouth.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations. To him who overcomes, I will give him to eat of the hidden manna. And I will give him a white stone, and upon the stone a new name written, which none knows except he who receives it.
I know thy works, and thy love and faith and service and perseverance. And thy last works are more than the first.
Nevertheless, I have against thee that thou tolerate thy woman Jezebel. She calls herself a prophetess, and teaches and leads astray my bondmen to fornicate, and to eat idol sacrifices.
And I gave her time so that she would repent, and she did not want to repent of her fornication.
Behold, I throw her into a bed, and those who commit adultery with her into great tribulation, if they do not repent of her works.
And I will kill her children in death. And all the congregations will know that I am he who searches the inner feelings and hearts. And I will give to you-to each-according to your works.
But I say to you, to those remaining in Thyatira, as many as have not this teaching, who do not know, as they say, the deep things of Satan, I do not cast upon you another burden.
But hold firm what ye have until I come.
And he who overcomes, and he who keeps my works until the end, to him I will give authority over the nations.
And he will tend them with a rod of iron (they will be shattered like ceramic vessels), as I also have received from my Father.
And I will give him the morning star.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations.

I know thy works, that thou have a name that thou live, and thou are dead.
Become thou watchful, and strengthen the remaining things that thou were going to throw away, for I have not found thy works made complete before my God.
Remember therefore how thou have received and heard, and be on guard, and repent. If therefore thou will not watch, I will come upon thee as a thief, and thou will, no, not know what hour I will come upon thee.
But thou have a few names in Sardis who did not defile their garments. And they will walk with me in white, because they are worthy.
He who overcomes, this man will be clothed in white garments, and I will, no, not erase his name out of the book of life. And I will acknowledge his name before my Father, and before his agents.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations.
I know thy works. Behold, I have given before thee an opened door that none is able to shut it, because thou have little power, and thou keep my word, and did not deny my name.
Behold, I give of the synagogue of Satan, those who say themselves to be Jews, and are not, but lie, behold, I will make them so that they will come and bow down before thy feet, and may know that I have loved thee.
Because thou keep the word of my perseverance, I also will keep thee from the hour of trial that is going to come upon the whole inhabited world, to try those who dwell upon the earth.
I come quickly, hold firm what thou have, so that none may take thy crown.
He who overcomes, I will make him a pillar in the temple of my God, and he will, no, not go out any more. And I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem (it comes down out of the heaven from my God), and my new name.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations.
I know thy works, that thou are neither cold nor hot. O that thou were cold or hot.
So because thou are lukewarm, and neither hot nor cold, I am going to spew thee out of my mouth.
Because thou say, I am rich, and have become wealthy, and have need of nothing, and do not know that thou are wretched and miserable and poor and blind and naked.
I counsel thee to buy from me gold refined from fire, so that thou may become wealthy, and white garments, so that thou may clothe thyself, and the shame of thy nakedness may not be made known, and eye-salve, so that thou may anoint thine eyes, so that thou may see.
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten. Be zealous therefore, and repent.
Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any man hears my voice and opens the door, I will come in to him, and will dine with him, and he with me.
He who overcomes, I will give him to sit with me in my throne, as I also overcame, and sat down with my Father in his throne.
He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the congregations.

After these things I looked, and behold, a door opened in heaven, and the first voice that I heard like a trumpet, speaking with me, saying, Come up here, and I will show thee what must happen after these things.
And straightaway I became in spirit. And behold, a throne was set in heaven, and him sitting upon the throne
similar in appearance to a jasper and a sardius stone. And a rainbow was around the throne, like an emerald in appearance.
And around the throne were twenty-four thrones, and upon the thrones were sitting twenty-four elders clothed in white garments, and golden crowns upon their heads.
And out of the throne proceeds lightnings and voices and thunders. And seven lamps of fire burned before his throne, which are the seven Spirits of God.
And before the throne was like a glassy sea similar to crystal. And in the midst of the throne, and all around the throne, were four living creatures containing eyes in front and back.
And the first living creature was similar to a lion, and the second living creature was similar to a young bull, and the third living creature having a face like a man, and the fourth living creature was similar to a flying eagle.
And the four living creatures, one by one, each having six wings, are full of eyes around and inside. And they have no cessation day and night, saying, Holy, holy, holy, Lord, the Almighty God, he was, and who is, and who is coming.
And whenever the living creatures give glory and honor and thanks to him who sits on the throne, he who lives into the ages of the ages,
the twenty-four elders would fall down before him who sits on the throne, and would worship him who lives into the ages of the ages, and would cast their crowns before the throne, saying,
Thou are worthy, our Lord and God, the Holy, to take the glory and the honor and the power, because thou created all things, and because by thy will they are, and were created.

And I saw at the right hand of him who sits on the throne a book, written inside and outside, sealed with seven seals.
And I saw a powerful agent proclaiming in a great voice, Who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals of it?
And none in heaven above nor on the earth nor under the earth was able to open the book or to see in it.
And I wept much because none was found worthy to open the book or to see in it.
And one of the elders says to me, Weep not, behold, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the Root of David, overcame to open the book and the seven seals of it.
And I saw in the midst of the throne and of the four living creatures, and in the midst of the elders, a Lamb standing, like it had been killed, having seven horns and seven eyes, which are the seven Spirits of God being sent forth into all the earth.
And he came and took it out of the right hand of him who sits on the throne.
And when he took the book, the four living creatures and the twenty-four elders fell down before the Lamb, each having a harp and golden bowls containing incense, which are the prayers of the sanctified.
And they sing a new song, saying, Thou are worthy to take the book and to open the seals of it, because thou were killed and purchased us from God by thy blood, out of every tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation.
And thou made them kings and priests to our God, and they will reign over the earth.
And I looked, and I heard as a voice of many agents all around the throne and the living creatures and the elders. And the number of them was ten thousands of ten thousands, and thousands of thousands,
saying with a great voice, Worthy is the Lamb that has been killed to receive the power, and wealth, and wisdom, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing!
And every creature that is in the heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and is in the sea, and things in them all, I heard saying, The blessing, and the honor, and the glory, and the dominion is to him who sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb, into the ages of the ages. Truly!
And the four living creatures were saying the Truly. And the elders fell down and worshiped.

And I saw that the Lamb opened one of the seven seals. And I heard one of the four living creatures saying like the sound of thunder, Come and see.
And behold, a white horse, and he who sits on it having a bow. And a crown was given to him, and he went forth conquering, and so that he might conquer.
And when he opened the second seal, I heard the second living creature saying, Come.
And another horse came forth, fiery red. And it was given to him (to him who sits on it) to take peace from the earth, so that they would kill each other. And a great sword was given to him.
And when he opened the third seal, I heard the third living creature saying, Come and see. And behold, a black horse, and he who sits on it having a balance in his hand.
And I heard a voice in the midst of the four living creatures saying, A measure of wheat for a denarius, and three measures of barley for a denarius. And thou may not harm the olive oil and the wine.
And when he opened the fourth seal, I heard the fourth living creature saying, Come and see.
And behold, a green horse, and he who sits on top of it. His name was Death, and Hades followed with him. And authority was given to him over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with starvation, and with what is deadly, and by the beasts of the earth.
And when he opened the fifth seal, I saw underneath the altar the souls of those who had been killed because of the word of God, and because of the testimony of the Lamb that they held.
And they cried out in a great voice, saying, Master, Holy and True, how long do thou not judge and avenge our blood from those who dwell on the earth?
And a white robe was given to them each, and it was said to them that they should still rest a time, until also their fellow bondmen, and their brothers, and those going to be killed as they too, would be fulfilled.
And I looked when he opened the sixth seal, and a great earthquake occurred, and the sun became black as hairy sackcloth, and the whole moon became as blood.
And the stars of the sky fell to the earth as a fig tree that casts its unripe figs being shaken by a great wind.
And the sky departed as a scroll being rolled up. And every mountain and island were moved out of their places.
And the kings of the earth, and the rulers, and the chief captains, and the rich, and the strong, and every bondman and freeman, hid themselves in the caves and in the rocks of the mountains.
And they say to the mountains and to the rocks, Fall on us, and hide us from the face of him who sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb.
Because the great day of his wrath has come, and who is able to stand?

And after this I saw four agents standing at the four corners of the earth, restraining the four winds of the earth, so that wind would not blow on the earth, or on the sea, or upon any tree.
And I saw another agent ascending from the rising of the sun, having a seal of the living God. And he cried out in a great voice to the four agents to whom it was given to them to harm the earth and the sea,
saying, Do not harm the earth, nor the sea, nor the trees, until we may seal the bondmen of our God on their foreheads.
And I heard the number of those sealed, a hundred and forty-four thousand sealed out of every tribe of the sons of Israel.
Twelve thousand were sealed from the tribe of Judah, twelve thousand from the tribe of Reuben, twelve thousand from the tribe of Gad,
twelve thousand from the tribe of Asher, twelve thousand from the tribe of Naphtali, twelve thousand from the tribe of Manasseh,
twelve thousand from the tribe of Simeon, twelve thousand from the tribe of Levi, twelve thousand from the tribe of Issachar,
twelve thousand from the tribe of Zebulun, twelve thousand from the tribe of Joseph, twelve thousand from the tribe of Benjamin, were sealed.
After these things, I looked and lo, a great multitude, which none could number, out of every nation, and tribes and peoples and tongues, standing before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed in white robes, and palms in their hands,
and crying out in a great voice, saying, Salvation is in our God who sits upon the throne, and in the Lamb!
And all the agents had stood all around the throne, and the elders, and the four living creatures, and they fell before his throne on their faces, and worshiped God,
saying, Truly! Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and strength, is for our God into the ages of the ages. Truly!
And one of the elders answered, saying to me, Who are these who are clothed in white robes, and where did they come from?
And I said to him, My lord, thou know. And he said to me, These are those coming out of the great tribulation, and they washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Because of this they are before the throne of God, and they serve him day and night in his temple. And he who sits on the throne will dwell among them.
They will hunger no more, nor will they thirst any more. The sun will, no, not fall upon them, nor any heat.
Because the Lamb in the midst of the throne will tend them, and will lead them to fountains of waters of life. And God will wipe away every tear from their eyes.

And when he opened the seventh seal, silence occurred in heaven, like half an hour.
And I saw the seven agents who stand before God, and seven trumpets were given to them.
And another agent came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer. And much incense was given to him, so that he would give with the prayers of all the sanctified upon the golden altar before the throne.
And the vapor of the incense, with the prayers of the sanctified, ascended before God out of the agent's hand.
And the agent who took the censer, also filled it from the fire of the altar, and cast it to the earth. And there occurred thunders, and voices, and lightnings, and an earthquake.
And the seven agents who have the seven trumpets prepared themselves so that they might sound.
And the first sounded, and there occurred hail and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast upon the earth. And the third part of the earth was burnt up, and the third part of the trees was burnt up, and all green grass was burnt up.
And the second agent sounded, and something like a great burning mountain was cast into the sea. And the third part of the sea became blood,
and the third part of the creatures in the sea (those having lives) died, and the third part of the ships was destroyed.
And the third agent sounded, and a great star fell from the heaven burning like a torch, and it fell upon the third part of the rivers, and upon the springs of the waters.
And the name of the star is called Wormwood oil. And the third part of the waters developed into wormwood oil, and many of the men died from the waters, because they were made bitter.
And the fourth agent sounded, and the third part of the sun was struck, and the third part of the moon, and the third part of the stars, so that the third part of them would be darkened. And the day did not shine the third part of it, and likewise the night.
And I looked, and I heard one eagle flying in mid-heaven, saying in a great voice, Woe, woe, woe, to those who dwell on the earth from the remaining sounds of the trumpet of the three agents who are going to sound.

And the fifth agent sounded, and I saw a star fallen from the sky to the earth. And the key of the pit of the abyss was given to him.
And he opened the pit of the abyss, and smoke ascended out of the pit, like smoke of a burning furnace. And the sun and the air were darkened from the smoke of the pit.
And locusts came forth out of the smoke upon the earth, and power was given to them, like the scorpions of the earth have power.
And it was told them that they should not hurt the grass of the earth, nor anything green, nor any tree, except the men who have not the seal of God on their foreheads.
And it was given them that they would not kill them, but that they would be tormented five months. And their torment was as the torment of a scorpion when it strikes a man.
And in those days men will seek death, and will, no, not find it. And they will long to die, and death will flee from them.
And the likeness of the locusts was similar to horses prepared for battle. And upon their heads were like golden crowns, and their faces were as men's faces.
And they had hair like the hair of women, and their teeth were as of lions.
And they had breastplates like iron breastplates. And the sound of their wings was like the sound of chariots of many horses running into battle.
And they have tails similar to scorpions, and stings. And in their tails they have power to hurt men five months.
Having a king over them, the agent of the abyss, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, but in the Greek he has the name Apollyon.
One woe is departed, behold, two woes yet come after these.
And the sixth agent sounded, and I heard a voice, one from the four horns of the golden altar before God,
saying to the sixth agent who has the trumpet, Loose the four agents who have been bound at the great river Euphrates.
And the four agents were loosed, who were prepared for the hour and for the day and month and year, so that they would kill the third part of men.
And the number of the armies of the horsemen was ten thousands of ten thousands. I heard the number of them.
And thus I saw the horses in the vision, and those who sit on them having breastplates fiery red, and hyacinth color, and brimstone. And the heads of the horses are like heads of lions, and out of their mouths come fire and smoke and brimstone.
By these three plagues the third part of men was killed, by the fire and the smoke and the brimstone coming out of their mouths.
For the power of the horses is in their mouth, and in their tails. For their tails are similar to serpents, having heads, and by them they injure.
And the rest of the men who were not killed by these plagues, did not repent of the works of their hands, so that they would not worship the demons, and the golden and silver and brass and stone and wooden idols, which can neither see nor hear nor walk.
And they did not repent of their murders, nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of their thefts.

And I saw a mighty agent coming down out of heaven, clothed with a cloud, and the rainbow was upon his head, and his face was like the sun, and his feet like pillars of fire,
and having in his hand an opened book. And he placed his right foot upon the sea, and the left upon the earth.
And he cried out in a great voice as a lion roars. And when he cried out, the seven thunders uttered their voices.
And when the seven thunders uttered, I was going to write. And I heard a voice from heaven saying, Seal up what the seven thunders uttered, and do not write them.
And the agent whom I saw standing upon the sea and upon the earth raised his right hand to heaven,
and swore by him who lives into the ages of the ages, who created the heaven and the things in it, and the earth and the things in it, and the sea and the things in it, that time would be no more.
But in the days of the voice of the seventh agent, when he is going to sound, even the mystery of God is finished, as he declared the good news to his bondmen the prophets.
And the voice that I heard from heaven was again speaking with me, and saying, Go, take the little book that has been opened in the hand of the agent who stands upon the sea and upon the earth.
And I went to the agent, telling him to give me the little book. And he says to me, Take and eat it. And it will make thy belly bitter, but it will be sweet as honey in thy mouth.
And I took the book out of the agent's hand, and ate it. And it was sweet as honey in my mouth, and when I had eaten it, my belly was made bitter.
And he says to me, Thou must prophesy again against many peoples, and against nations and tongues and kings.

And there was given me a reed similar to a rod, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and those who worship in it.
And leave out the court outside the temple, and do not measure it, because it has been given to the nations. And they will trample the holy city forty-two months.
And I will give to my two witnesses, and they will prophesy a thousand two hundred and sixty days clothed in sackcloth.
These men are the two olive trees and the two lampstands, having stood before the Lord of the earth.
And if any man wants to harm them, fire comes out of their mouth and devours their enemies. And if any man wants to harm them, he must be killed this way.
These men have authority to shut the sky, so that it may not rain the days of their prophecy. And they have authority over the waters to turn them into blood, and to strike the earth with every plague, as often as they may desire.
And when they have finished their testimony, the beast that ascends out of the abyss will make war with them, and he will overcome them and kill them.
And their corpses are in the thoroughfare of the great city, which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified.
And out of the peoples and tribes and tongues and nations they see their corpses three and a half days. And they will not allow their corpses to be put in a sepulcher.
And those who dwell upon the earth rejoice over them, and will celebrate, and will give gifts to each other, because these two prophets tormented those who dwell on the earth.
And after the three and a half days a spirit of life from God entered into them, and they stood upon their feet, and great fear fell upon those who watched them.
And I heard a great voice from heaven saying to them, Come up here. And they ascended up into heaven in the cloud, and their enemies watched them.
And in that day a great earthquake occurred, and the tenth part of the city fell. And seven thousand names of men were killed in the earthquake. And the rest became afraid, and gave glory to the God of heaven.
The second woe departed. Behold, the third woe comes quickly.
And the seventh agent sounded, and great voices occurred in heaven, saying, The kingdom of the world has become of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he will reign into the ages of the ages.
And the twenty-four elders who sit before the throne of God, on their thrones, fell upon their faces and worshiped God,
saying, We thank thee, Lord God Almighty, who is and was, because thou have taken thy great power and reigned.
And the nations were angry. And thy wrath came, and the time of the dead to be judged, and to give the reward to thy bondmen the prophets, and to the sanctified, and to those who fear thy name, the small and the great, and to destroy those who destroy the earth.
And the temple of God was opened in heaven, and the ark of the covenant of the Lord was seen in his temple. And there occurred lightnings, and voices, and thunders, and great hail.

And a great sign was seen in heaven. A woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and a crown of twelve stars upon her head.
And having in her womb, she cried out, suffering birth pains, and suffering to give birth.
And another sign was seen in heaven. And behold, a great fiery red dragon, having seven heads and ten horns, and seven diadems upon his heads.
And his tail drags the third part of the stars of the sky, and cast them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman who was going to give birth, so that when she gave birth he might devour her child.
And she gave birth to a son, a male who was going to tend all the nations with an iron rod. And her child was taken up to God and to his throne.
And the woman fled into the wilderness where she has a place there prepared by God, so that they may nourish her there a thousand two hundred sixty days.
Michael and his agents to fight with the dragon. And the dragon and his agents fought.
And he did not prevail, nor was a place found for him any more in heaven.
And the great dragon was cast out, the ancient serpent, called the Devil and Satan, he who leads the whole world astray. He was cast out to the earth, and his agents were cast out with him.
And I heard a great voice in heaven, saying, Now it came to pass, the salvation, and the power, and the kingdom of our God, and the authority of his Christ. Because the accuser of our brothers was cast out, who accuses them before our God day and night.
And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony. And they loved not their life to the point of death.
Rejoice because of this, O heavens, and ye who dwell in them. Woe to the earth and the sea, because the devil has come down to you, having great wrath, knowing that he has little time.
And when the dragon saw that he was cast to the earth, he persecuted the woman who gave birth to the male.
And two wings of the great eagle were given to the woman, so that she might fly into the wilderness to her place. So that she might be nourished there for a time, and times, and half a time, from the face of the serpent.
And the serpent cast water like a river out of his mouth after the woman, so that he might make her carried away by the flood.
And the earth helped the woman. And the earth opened its mouth and swallowed the river that the dragon cast out of his mouth.
And the dragon was angry toward the woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, those keeping the commandments of God, and having the testimony of Jesus.

And I stood upon the sand of the sea. And I saw a beast rising up out of the sea having ten horns, and seven heads, and ten diadems upon its horns, and upon its heads names of blasphemy.
And the beast that I saw was similar to a leopard. And its feet were like a bear, and its mouth like the mouth of a lion. And the dragon gave to it his power, and his throne, and great authority.
And one of its heads was as in death, having been killed. And its deadly wound was healed. And the whole earth marveled behind the beast.
And they worshiped the dragon who gave authority to the beast. And they worshiped the beast, saying, Who is like the beast, and who is able to war against it?
And a mouth was given to it speaking great things and blasphemy. And authority was given it to make war forty-two months.
And it opened its mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name and his tabernacle, those who dwell in heaven.
And it was given it to make war with the sanctified, and to overcome them. And authority over every tribe and people and tongue and nation was given to it.
And all who dwell upon the earth will worship it, whose name has not been written in the book of life of the Lamb who was killed from the foundation of the world.
If any man has an ear, let him hear.
If any man keeps in captivity, he goes. If any man kills with a sword, he must be killed with a sword. Here is the perseverance and the faith of the sanctified.
And I saw another beast coming up out of the earth, and it had two horns similar to a lamb, and it spoke like a dragon.
And it exercises all the authority of the first beast before it. And it made the earth and those who dwell in it so that they would worship the first beast, whose mortal wound was healed.
And it does great signs, so that even fire would come down out of the sky upon the earth in the sight of men.
And it leads my kind astray (those dwelling on the earth) because of the signs that were given it to do in the sight of the beast, telling those who dwell on the earth to make an image to the beast that had the sword-wound and lived.
And it was given it to give a spirit to the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast would both speak, and would make as many as would not ever worship the image of the beast be killed.
And it makes all, the small and the great, and the rich and the poor, and the freemen and the bondmen, that they would give them marks on their right hand, or on their foreheads.
And so that not any man can buy or sell unless having the mark-the name of the beast or the number of its name.
He who has understanding, let him calculate the number of the beast, for it is a number of a man. And its number is 666.

And I looked, and lo, the Lamb standing on the mount Zion, and with it a number, a hundred and forty-four thousand, having its name and the name of his Father, written on their foreheads.
And I heard a sound from heaven as a sound of many waters, and as a sound of great thunder. And the voice that I heard was as of harpers harping with their harps.
And they sing a new song before the throne, and before the four living creatures and the elders. And none could learn the song except the hundred and forty-four thousand, those who have been redeemed from the earth.
These are men who were not defiled with women, for they are virgins. These are those who follow the Lamb wherever he goes. These were purchased by Jesus, out of men, a first fruit to God and to the Lamb.
And no lie was found in their mouth, for they are unblemished.
And I saw an agent flying in mid-heaven having eternal good news to proclaim to those who sit on the earth, and to every nation and tribe and tongue and people,
saying in a great voice, Fear God, and give him glory, because the hour of his judgment has come. And worship him who made the heaven and the earth and the sea and springs of waters.
And another, a second agent, followed, saying, Babylon the great has fallen, has fallen. She has given all the nations to drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
And another agent, a third, followed them, saying in a great voice, If any man worships the beast and its image, and receives a mark on his forehead or on his hand,
he also himself will drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which was mixed undiluted in the cup of his anger. And he will be tormented with fire and brimstone before the holy agents and before the Lamb.
And the smoke of their torment ascends into the ages of ages. And they have no rest day and night, those who worship the beast and its image, and if any man receives the mark of its name.
Here is the perseverance of the sanctified. Here are those who keep the commandments of God, and the faith of Jesus.
And I heard a voice from heaven saying to me, Write, Blessed are the dead who die in the Lord from henceforth. Yea, says the Spirit, so that they may rest from their toils, and their works follow with them.
And I looked, and behold, a white cloud. And sitting upon the cloud, like a son of man, having a golden crown on his head and a sharp sickle in his hand.
And another agent came out from the temple, crying out in a great voice to him who sits on the cloud, Send forth thy sickle and reap, because the hour has come to reap, because the harvest of the earth is ripe.
And he who sits on the cloud cast his sickle upon the earth, and the earth was reaped.
And another agent came out from the temple in heaven, also himself having a sharp sickle.
And another agent came out from the altar having power over the fire. And he cried out in a great shout to him who has the sharp sickle, saying, Send forth thy sharp sickle, and gather the clusters of the grapevine of the earth, because its grapes are fully ripe.
And the agent sent his sickle to the earth, and gathered the vintage of the earth, and cast it into the great winepress of the wrath of God.
And the winepress was trampled outside the city, and blood came out from the winepress, up to the bridles of the horses, as far as a thousand and six hundred furlongs.

seven agents having seven plagues, the last, because in them the wrath of God is ended.
And I saw like a glassy sea mingled with fire, and those who were victorious over the beast and over its image and over the number of its name, standing on the glassy sea, having harps of God.
And they sing the song of Moses the bondman of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, righteous and true are thy ways, thou King of the nations.
Who will, no, not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name, because thou alone are holy? Because all the nations will come and worship before thee, because thy righteous deeds were made known.
And after these things I looked, and the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened.
And the seven agents came forth from the temple having the seven plagues, who were clothed in pure bright linen, and golden belts girded around their breasts.
And one of the four living creatures gave to the seven agents seven golden bowls containing the wrath of God who lives into the ages of the ages.
And the temple became full of vapor from the glory of God and from his power. And none was able to enter into the temple until the seven plagues of the seven agents were ended.

And I heard a great voice out of the temple, saying to the seven agents, Go ye and pour out the seven bowls of the wrath of God into the earth.
And the first went and poured out his bowl into the earth, and a bad and evil sore developed upon the men who have the mark of the beast and who worship its image.
And the second agent poured out his bowl into the sea, and it became blood like of a dead man, and every living soul in the sea died.
And the third agent poured out his bowl into the rivers and into the springs of the waters, and they became blood.
And I heard the agent of the waters saying, Thou are righteous who is and was-the Divine-because thou judged these things.
Because they poured out the blood of the sanctified and prophets, and thou have given them blood to drink; they are deserving.
And I heard the altar saying, Yea, Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgments.
And the fourth agent poured out his bowl upon the sun, and it was given him to scorch men with fire.
And the men were scorched with great heat. And the men blasphemed the name of God who has power over these plagues, and they did not repent to give him glory.
And the fifth agent poured out his bowl upon the throne of the beast, and its kingdom became darkened, and they gnawed their tongues from the anguish.
And they blasphemed the God of heaven from their pains and from their sores. And they did not repent of their works.
And the sixth agent poured out his bowl upon the great river Euphrates, and the water of it was dried up, so that the way of the kings from the rising of the sun might be prepared.
And I saw out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet, three unclean spirits like frogs.
For they are spirits of demons, doing signs that go forth to the kings of the whole world, to gather them together to the battle of that great day of the Almighty God.
(Behold, I come as a thief. Blessed is he who watches, and keeps his garments, so that he may not walk naked, and they see his shame.)
And he gathered them together into the place called in Hebrew, Armageddon.
And the seventh agent poured out his bowl upon the air, and a great voice came forth out of the temple of heaven, out of the throne, saying, It has come to pass.
And there occurred lightnings, and thunders, and voices. And a great earthquake occurred, such as did not happen from that time men came to be upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake, so great.
And the great city became in three parts, and the cities of the nations fell. And the great Babylon was remembered before God, to give to her the cup of the wine of the wrath of his anger.
And every island fled away, and the mountains were not found.
And great hail, like a talent weight, descended out of the sky upon men. And the men blasphemed God from the plague of the hail, because the plague of it was exceedingly great.

And one of the seven agents who had the seven bowls came and spoke with me, saying, Come, I will show thee the judgment of the great whore who sits upon the many waters
with whom the kings of the earth fornicated, and those who inhabit the earth were made drunken with the wine of her fornication.
And he carried me away in spirit into a wilderness. And I saw a woman sitting upon a scarlet-colored beast containing names of blasphemy, having seven heads and ten horns.
And the woman was clothed in purple and scarlet, adorned with gold and precious stone and pearls, having in her hand a golden cup containing abominations and the filthy things of her fornication,
and upon her forehead a name written, MYSTERY, BABYLON THE GREAT, THE MOTHER OF WHORES AND OF THE ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH.
And I saw the woman drunken from the blood of the sanctified, and from the blood of the witnesses of Jesus. And having seen her, I wondered with great amazement.
And the agent said to me, Why did thou wonder? I will tell thee the mystery of the woman, and of the beast that carries her, which has the seven heads and the ten horns.
The beast that thou saw was, and is not, and is going to ascend out of the abyss and go into destruction. And those who dwell on the earth will wonder, whose names have not been written in the book of life from the foundation of the world, when they see the beast that was, and is not, and will come.
The seven heads are seven mountains where the woman sits on them.
And there are seven kings, the five are fallen, the one is, the other has not yet come, and when he comes he must remain a little while.
And the beast that was, and is not, he also is an eighth, and is of the seven, and he goes into destruction.
And the ten horns that thou saw are ten kings who have not yet received a kingdom, but they receive authority as kings one hour with the beast.
These have one mind, and they give their power and authority to the beast.
These will war against the Lamb, and the Lamb will conquer them, because he is Lord of lords and King of kings. And those with him are the called and chosen and faithful.
And he says to me, The waters that thou saw, where the whore sits, are peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.
And the ten horns that thou saw, and the beast, these will hate the whore, and will make her desolate, and will make her naked, and will eat her flesh, and will burn her with fire.
For God gave in their hearts to do his will. Even to do one will, and to give their kingdom to the beast until the words of God would be ended.
And the woman whom thou saw is the great city having reign over the kings of the earth.

And after these things I saw another agent coming down out of heaven having great authority, and the earth was illuminated from his glory.
And he cried out in a mighty voice, saying, Babylon the great has fallen, has fallen, and became a habitation of demons, and a hold of every unclean spirit, and a hold of every unclean and hated bird.
Because all the nations have drunk from the wine of the wrath of her fornication. And the kings of the earth fornicated with her, and the merchants of the earth became rich from the power of her wantonness.
And I heard another voice from heaven, saying, Come out from her, my people, so that ye may not participate with her sins, and that ye may not receive from her plagues.
Because her sins have reached as far as heaven, and God has remembered her iniquities.
Render to her as she also rendered to you, and double to her two-fold according to her works. In the cup that she mixed, mix two-fold for her.
In an amount she glorified herself and lived wantonly, give her so much torment and grief, because she says in her heart, I sit a queen, and am no widow, and will, no, not see grief.
Because of this her plagues will come in one day, death, and grief, and famine. And she will be utterly burned with fire, because strong is the Lord, the God who judged her.
And the kings of the earth who fornicated and lived wantonly with her, will weep and will beat their breasts for her when they see the smoke of her burning,
having stood from afar because of the fear of her torment, saying, Alas, alas, the great city, Babylon, the mighty city! Because thy judgment has come in one hour.
And the merchants of the earth will weep and mourn for her, because no man buys their merchandise any more,
merchandise of gold, and silver, and precious stone, and pearl, and fine linen, and purple, and silk, and scarlet, and all thyine wood, and every ivory vessel, and every vessel of most precious wood, and of brass, and iron, and marble,
and cinnamon, and incense, and ointment, and frankincense, and wine, and olive oil, and fine flour, and wheat, and sheep, and cattle, and horses, and chariots, and bodies and souls of men.
And the fruit of the lust of thy soul have departed from thee. And all the fat and bright things are destroyed from thee. And thou will, no, not find them any more.
The merchants of these things who became rich from her will stand from afar because of the fear of her torment, weeping and mourning,
and saying, Alas, alas, the great city, which was clothed in fine linen and purple and scarlet, and adorned with gold and precious stone and pearls!
Because in one hour such great wealth was devastated. And every shipmaster, and every man who sails anywhere, and sailors, and as many as work by sea, stood from afar
and cried out seeing the smoke of her burning, saying, What is like the great city?
And they cast dust on their heads, and cried out, weeping and mourning, and saying, Alas, alas, the great city in which all who had ships in the sea became rich from her luxuriance! Because in one hour she was devastated.
Be glad over her, thou heaven, and the sanctified, and the apostles, and the prophets, because God has decreed your judgment of her.
And one mighty agent took up a stone like a great millstone and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus in violence Babylon the great city will be thrown down, and will, no, not be found any more.
And a sound of harpers and minstrels and flute-players and trumpeters will, no, not be heard in thee any more. And every craftsman of every craft will, no, not be found in thee any more. And a sound of a millstone will, no, not be heard in thee any more.
And the light of a lamp will, no, not shine in thee any more. And a voice of a bridegroom and of a bride will, no, not be heard in thee any more. Because thy merchants were the chief men of the earth, because all the nations were led astray by thy enchantments.
And in her was found blood of prophets, and of the sanctified, and of all who have been killed upon the earth.

And after these things I heard as a great sound of a large multitude in heaven, saying, Praise the Lord, the salvation, and the power, and the glory of our God!
Because true and righteous are his judgments, because he has judged the great whore who ruined the earth by her fornication, and he has avenged the blood of his bondmen from her hand.
And a second time they said, Praise the Lord! And the smoke of her ascended into the ages of the ages.
And the twenty-four elders and the four living creatures fell down and worshiped God who sits on the throne, saying, Truly! Praise the Lord!
And a voice came forth from the throne, saying, Praise ye our God, all his bondmen and those who fear him, the small and the great.
And I heard as the sound of a large multitude, and as the sound of many waters, and as the sound of mighty thunders, saying, Praise the Lord! Because the Lord our God, the Almighty, reigns.
We should be glad and rejoice and give the glory to him, because the marriage of the Lamb has come, and his wife has prepared herself.
And it was given her that she clothe herself in fine linen, bright and pure. For the fine linen is the righteous deeds of the sanctified.
And he says to me, Write, Blessed are those who have been called to the supper of the marriage of the Lamb. And he says to me, These are the true sayings of God.
And I fell down before his feet to worship him. And he says to me, See thou not. I am a fellow bondman of thee and thy brothers, those who have the testimony of Jesus. Worship God, for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.
And I saw the heaven opened, and behold a white horse, and he who sits upon it called Faithful and True, and in righteousness he judges and makes war.
And his eyes are a flame of fire, and upon his head are many diadems having names written, and a name written that none knows except he himself,
and clothed in a garment dipped in blood. And his name is called The Word of God.
And the armies in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed in fine linen, pure white.
And a sharp two-edged sword comes out of his mouth, so that he would smite the nations by it. And he will tend them with a rod of iron. And he treads the winepress of the wine of the wrath of the anger of the Almighty God.
And he has on his garment and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.
And I saw one agent having stood in the sun, and he cried out in a great voice, saying to all the birds flying in mid-heaven, Come, gather together to the great supper of God,
so that ye may eat the flesh of kings, and the flesh of captains, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses and of those who sit upon them, and the flesh of all men, both freemen and bondmen, and both small and great.
And I saw the beast, and the kings of the earth, and their armies gathered together to make war against him who sits upon the horse, and against his army.
And the beast was taken, and the false prophet with it who did the signs in its sight by which he led astray those who received the mark of the beast and those who worship its image. The two were thrown alive into the lake of fire that burns with brimstone.
And the others were killed by the sword that comes forth out of his mouth (of him who sits upon the horse), and all the birds were filled from their flesh.

And I saw an agent coming down out of heaven having the key of the abyss and a great chain in his hand.
And he seized the dragon, the old serpent, who is the Devil and Satan, who leads the whole world astray, and bound him a thousand years.
And he cast him into the abyss, and locked and sealed over him, so that he would no longer lead the nations astray until the thousand years were ended. After these things he must be loosed for a little time.
And I saw thrones, and they sat upon them. And judgment was given to them and the souls of those who were beheaded because of the testimony of Jesus, and because of the word of God, and who did not worship the beast nor his image, and did not receive the mark upon their forehead and upon their hand. And they lived, and reigned with the Christ the thousand years.
The rest of the dead did not live until the thousand years were ended. This is the first resurrection.
Blessed and holy is he who has part in the first resurrection. On these the second death has no power, but they will be priests of God and of the Christ, and will reign with him a thousand years.
And when the thousand years are ended, Satan will be loosed out of his prison.
And he will come forth to lead astray the nations in the four corners of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them together to the battle, of whom the number of them is as the sand of the sea.
And they went up on the breadth of the earth, and surrounded the encampment of the sanctified and the beloved city. And fire came down out of heaven from God, and devoured them.
And the devil who leads them astray was cast into the lake of fire and brimstone, where also were the beast and the false prophet. And they will be tormented day and night into the ages of the ages.
And I saw a great white throne, and him who sits upon it, from whose face the earth and the sky fled away, and no place was found for them.
And I saw the dead, the great and the small, standing before the throne, and books were opened, and another book was opened, which is the one of life. And the dead were judged from the things that were written in the books, according to their works.
And the sea gave up the dead in it, and death and Hades gave up the dead in them. And they were judged, each according to their works.
And death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death, the lake of fire.
And if any man was found not written in the book of life, he was thrown into the lake of fire.

And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the first earth passed away, and the sea is no more.
And I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God, having been prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they will be his people. And God himself will be with them.
And he will wipe away every tear from their eyes. And there will not be any more death, nor grief, nor crying, nor will there be any more anguish, because the former things are gone.
And he who sits upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things new. And he says to me, Write, because these words are true and faithful.
And he said to me, I have become, I, the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning and the end. I will give to him who is thirsty of the fountain of the water of life freely.
He who overcomes will inherit these things, and I will be God to him, and he will be a son to me.
But for the cowards, and unbelieving, and sinful, and abominable, and murderers, and fornicators, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, their part is in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death.
And there came one of the seven agents who had the seven bowls containing the seven last plagues, and he spoke with me, saying, Come, I will show thee the woman, the bride of the Lamb.
And he carried me away in spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me the great city, holy Jerusalem, coming down out of heaven from God,
having the glory of God, the light of it similar to a most precious stone, like a jasper stone being crystal clear,
from the east, three gates, and from the north, three gates, and from the south, three gates, and from the west, three gates.
And the wall of the city having twelve foundations, and on them the twelve names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
And he who spoke with me had a measure, a golden reed, so that he might measure the city, and the gates of it, and the walls of it.
And the city lies foursquare, and the length of it is as great as the breadth. And he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs, the length and the breadth and the height of it being equal.
And he measured the wall of it, a hundred and forty-four forearms, a measure of a man, that is, of an agent.
And the structure of its wall was jasper. And the city was pure gold, similar to clear glass.
And the foundations of the wall of the city adorned with every precious stone. The first foundation was jasper, the second, sapphire, the third, chalcedony, the fourth, emerald,
the fifth, sardonyx, the sixth, sardius, the seventh, chrysolite, the eighth, beryl, the ninth, topaz, the tenth, chrysoprase, the eleventh, jacinth, the twelfth, amethyst.
And the twelve gates were twelve pearls apiece, each one of the gates was of one pearl. And the thoroughfare of the city was pure gold, like transparent glass.
And I saw no temple in it, for the Lord God Almighty is the temple of it, and the Lamb.
And the city has no need of the sun, nor of the moon, so that they might shine in it, for the glory of God illuminated it, and the light of it is the Lamb.
And the nations will walk by the light of it. And the kings of the earth bring to them the splendor and worth of the nations into it.
And the gates of it will, no, not be locked by day, for there will be no night there.
And they will bring the splendor and the worth of the nations into it.
And there will, no, not enter into it anything profane, and doing an abomination and a lie, since they are not written in the Lamb's book of life.

And he showed me a pure river of water of life, bright as crystal, coming out from the throne of God and of the Lamb,
in the middle of its thoroughfare. And on this side of the river and on that was a tree of life, bearing twelve fruits, yielding its fruit according to each month. And the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.
And there will be no curse there. And the throne of God and of the Lamb will be in it, and his bondmen will serve him.
And they will see his face, and his name is on their foreheads.
And there will be no night there, and they have no need of a lamp and the light of sun, because the Lord God will illuminate them. And they will reign into the ages of the ages.
And he says to me, These words are faithful and true. And the Lord, the God of the spirits of the prophets, sent his agent to show to his bondmen the things that must quickly come to pass.
And behold, I come quickly. Blessed is he who keeps the words of the prophecy of this book.
And I am John, the man hearing and seeing these things. And when I heard and saw, I fell down to worship before the feet of the agent showing me these things.
And he says to me, See thou not. I am thy fellow bondman, and of thy brothers the prophets, and of those who keep the words of this book. Worship God!
And he says to me, Do not seal the words of the prophecy of this book, for the time is near.
Let the man doing wrong still do wrong, and let the filthy man still be filthy. And let the righteous man still do righteousness, and let the holy man still be holy.
Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is with me to render to each man as his work will be
-I, the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last, the beginning and the end.
Blessed are those doing his commandments, so that their right will be to the tree of life, and they may enter in the gates into the city.
Outside are the dogs, and the sorcerers, and the fornicators, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and every man who loves and makes a lie.
I, Jesus, have sent my agent to testify these things to you for the congregations. I am the root and the offspring of David, the bright, the morning star.
And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And he who hears, let him say, Come. And he who is thirsty, let him come. He who desires, let him take the water of life freely.
I testify to every man who hears the words of the prophecy of this book, if any man should add to them, God will add to him the seven plagues that are written in this book.
And if any man takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his part from the tree of life, and from the holy city, the things written in this book.
He who testifies these things says, Yea, I come quickly. Truly. Yea, come, Lord Jesus!
The grace of the Lord Jesus is with all the sanctified. Truly.
